Name Name		
Term Paper
The New “Madonna”

	Hilary Rodham Clinton was the backbone of the White House, just as many previous First Ladies were. Despite this, their dedication to their husband’s careers and to politics has not been publicly recognized. The First Ladies were often viewed as over stepping their boundaries and denounced for their open actions in politics. By changing her persona and changing her political career Hilary Clinton is now more accepted by the public. These recent changes earned her the new nickname “Madonna”, instead of her old nickname “First Lady Bitch”, given to her by Newt Gingrich in an interview with Connie Chung. Throughout her political career Hilary Clinton has been an advocate for equality and change and has transformed her own public persona and the persona of women in politics by restructuring her own appearance, manners and personality.
	In our society the traditional role of a woman was home-maker, although times have changed, apparently the public’s views have not. First Ladies who have participated in political roles in the public eye have been criticized even though it is known that they have helped direct their husband’s career. Once the First Lady leaves her traditional roles she is criticized and often thought of as achieving recognition solely through their husband’s career.  Hilary Clinton was not the first to leave these confining roles. Barbara Bush gave a speech at Wellesley College and was faced with outrage from citizens, but previously she had been extremely popular in the American public. Hilary Clinton is trying to transform the traditional role of woman and make it more acceptable to the public and she has already made huge steps towards this transformation by becoming a part of politics herself (Bosterdorf).
	As First Lady, Hilary Clinton was viewed as pushy and arrogant, the “First Lady Bitch” knew what and how she wanted situations to be dealt with. When the Clinton’s moved into the White House Hilary allegedly said “I want those people gone, I want our people in there,” when referring to the Travel Office. Most Presidents do use ‘their’ people when dealing with close contact because they understand and are able to communicate their needs and requirements. Unlike the conventional way of bringing your people in, which is moving the old people to other positions, Hilary had them all fired.  Newt Gingrich looked at Hilary’s actions and labeled her “Bitch”.  The harsh persona caught on and before she could continue her political career, she would have to change her image (Parks).
	 Hilary Clinton has always been a key component of her husband’s presidency, making sure that plans run smoothly and always one-step ahead. Bill Clinton, just like every other President, needs for a strong, politically active wife. Once, on the way to a campaign event, Bill Clinton realized the poster boy for the American Agriculture Movement was going to be attending and he was unaware of the state of affairs. Luckily, Hilary had researched the situation and gave Bill a quick overview and a few neutral points to bring up in conversation, Bill turned to the author and said, “Isn’t she great” (Hillary, 2). Although Hilary may be harsh and outspoken at times, she is essential to Bill Clinton presidency and should be referred to as co-president. 
        	On January 20th 1998, the news caught wind of Bill Clinton’s alleged affair with 24 year old former white house intern Monica Lewinsky. Through it all, Hilary stuck by her husband, during the news coverage and impeachment crisis. She even wrote about her emotions throughout the scandal in the book living history. 
        No matter what he had done, I did not think that any person deserved the abusive 	treatment he had received. His privacy, my privacy, Monica Lewinsky’s 	privacy… had been invaded… I believe what my husband did was morally 	wrong… I also knew his failing was not a betrayal of his country. (Clinton, 471)
Her reliability and faith in her husband allowed the American public to more openly accept what was going on. For those who did not, or did not want to believe the allegations, Hilary stood for purity and morality, if she supported our President so could everyone else. For the rest of the public who believed that President Clinton was guilty, they looked to Hilary and saw forgiveness, like the blessing of Virgin Mary (Anderson). Without Hilary’s support Bill Clinton’s presidency would have crumbled shortly after the alleged affairs.
	Since the termination of her husband’s presidency, she has become the NY State Senator and has started to change her persona. “Madonna” has now been adopted as her new nickname for her work in making New York a better state and being a world-wide advocate for democracy and education. Madonna can take on many meanings, the earliest mention of Madonna was in the Bible, intending for a morally wholesome understanding. Another take on Madonna would be the pop star that stands for feminism and liberated oneself. Either interpretation allows for a better understanding and greater acceptance of Hilary (Anderson). Hilary Rodham Clinton now uses her maiden name, Rodham, as another way to distinguish herself from her husband and gain the support of the public. As being a former First Lady, she has been cast in her husband’s shadow; this unfair advantage allows room for much public scrutiny. She also cut her hair into a more feminist hairstyle and started wearing pastel colors (Anderson, 4). David Brock describes Hilary Rodham Clinton as the, “First Lady who really broke the mold: as a professional spouse and working mother with her own office in the West Wing of the White House” (Hillary 4).
        The name ‘Madonna’ acts as a metaphor for Hilary Rodham Clinton. The Biblical Madonna allows Rodham Clinton to be viewed as, “sexless saint to empowered mother to heterogeneous individual” (Anderson, 2). The public got to see her feminine side in mother- daughter photographs that were taken when the Clinton’s traveled around the world before Chelsea went to college, and in her book It Takes a Village and Other Lessons Children Teach Us. Rodham Clinton is more widely accepted by the public since she has taken on the more traditional role as mother.
        When Hilary Rodham Clinton was traveling the world giving speeches on women’s rights her toughness was more accepted because it was viewed as “maternal strength” (Anderson 3). Her central theme was empowerment for women and girls. The New York Times wrote, 
Speaking more forcefully on human rights than any American dignitary has on Chinese soil, Hilary Rodham Clinton catalogued a devastating litany of abuse that has afflicted women around the world today and criticized China for seeking to limit free and open discussion of women’s issues here. (Anderson, 3)
By broadening her themes she was viewed as more feminine and therefore accepted by the public. Hilary must first take small powerful steps before she can empower the same freedoms of men in politics. 
	“Honor the past, imagine the future” was Rodham Clinton’s campaign theme. This quote could also describe her own personal changes. Like the modern day Madonna of the entertainment industry, Rodham Clinton is able to simultaneously incorporate past tradition with new opportunities for women. While on tour with Save America’s Treasures Rodham Clinton was able to emphasize women’s importance in history. She recognized not only well-known individuals, but little-known women who have influenced our society and connected the two spheres of the traditional woman and the working woman (Anderson, 9).
	Hilary has gained much of the public’s support through Environment and Public Works Committees, promises of national, homeland and economic securities and New York’s 9/11 cleanup and recovery (About). She also tries to clear up misconceptions about outspoken women; before they were referred to as “Mannish women, old maids” (Anderson 6) but now are seen as strong leaders. Due to Rodham Clinton’s support for women’s freedom, the American public is now accepting of women in politics. If Hilary Rodham Clinton continues to encourage women rights, economic opportunity, religious tolerance and security she may someday become our first woman president (About).







Works Cited
“About Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton.” Senator Hilary Rodham Clinton. Online. Google. 26 Oct. 2003.< http://clinton.senate.gov/about_hrc.html>
Anderson, Karrin Vasby. “Hillary Rodham Clinton as ‘Madonna’: The role of metaphor and oxymoron in image restoration.” Women’s Studies in Communication 25.1 (2002): Online. Proquest. 26 Oct. 2003. http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=3&sid=9&srchmode=1&vinst=PROD&fmt=3&startpage=1&clientid=3262&vname=PQD&did=000000123098951&scaling=FULL&ts=1067317053&vtype=PQD&rqt=309&TS=1067317079&clientId=3262
Bostdorff, Denise M. “Public Opinion, the First Ladyship, and Hilary Rodham Clinton.” Presidential Studies Quarterly 27.3 (1997): 610-13. Online. Proquest. 26 Oct. 2003. http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=19&did=000000022142038&SrchMode=1&sid=9&Fmt=3&VInst=PROD&VType=PQD&RQT=309&VName=PQD&TS=1067318001&clientId=3262
Clinton, Hilary Rodham. Living History. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2003.
“Hillary Rodham Clinton as First Lady.” The American Enterprise 11.5 (2000): Online. Proquest. 26 Oct. 2003. http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index=11&did=000000055141111&SrchMode=1&sid=9&Fmt=4&VInst=PROD&VType=PQD&RQT=309&VName=PQD&TS=1067318001&clientId=3262

Parks, Bob. “Living Hilary…For Free.” Online. Google. 26 Oct. 2003. 	<http://www.washingtondispatch.com-cgi-bin/artman/exec/view.cgi/21/5738> 

??

??

??

??




1


