Name Name
Paper # 3

Fight For Your Rights
        
        As Americans, civil liberties are our right.  They are what defines our country and makes it so unique.  When the Constitution was written, it guarenteed us certain rights; a right to privacy and a right to freedom of speech are just a few examples.  Since the terroristic attacks of September 11th, it seems that we, as Americans, have sacrificed our civil liberties in order to increase national security.  
	On that fateful Tuesday morning when America was under attack, we became incredibly vulnerable as a nation.  The American government, as a whole, strived to increase national security with intents on preventing further attacks and possibly finding the terrorists responsible for the September 11th incident.  In doing this, they began to invade people’s lives and strip them of their rights as Americans, rights that are given to us at birth.  It seems as though the smallest details give George W. Bush and his administration the right to investigate the lives of American citizens by monitoring private things such as phone calls and e-mails.  Accusations of being a terrorist may be given for only disagreeing with the president’s decisions or being against war in general.  Having an opinion and being able to openly state it is becoming hazardous to oneself.  This affect on our freedom of speech is a violation of the first amendment.  Some Americans consider this the most important amendment, so violating it could cause a tremendous upheavel throughout the nation.
        After the tragedy of September 11th, it was increasingly difficult to be an American with an Arabic or Muslim heritage.  That trait alone seemed to be enough evidence that you might be guilty of terroristic acts.   Being a suspected terrorist based on your ethnic background could involve you in a horrible situation where you might be put on trial or deported.  For example, two United States citizens in particular were designated as enemy combatants and may be confined with no charge. (Lane, Charles.) 
        Along with persecuting people based on their ethnicity, things are being done in order to make the country seem safer, but are they worth it to surrender your civil rights?  I am sure that keeping this country safe is important to almost all American citizens, but when is the Bush administration going to put their searches and seizes to a hault?  It seems unreal that the government may search the belongings of citizens without probable cause and seize what they choose.  Prisoners may not be allowed to have private conversations with their legal representation.  Americans accused of crimes may be denied lawyers or sent to prison indefinitely without a trial or even being charged.  That is not what this country is about and it is not what the United States of America stands for.  Keeping this country safe may be priority, but stealing people’s rights away from them without probable cause seems unjustifiable.  Even the federal government should not be allowed to deny citizens of what was promised to them so long ago by the founding fathers.  
        National security is crucial and it is my belief that hindering my rights as an American because of suspicion or authorital position is not fair, but I feel that I must be willing to surrender my rights temporarily until the federal government feels that our country is no longer in jeopardy.  As an American citizen, I do not want to feel afraid or fear for the welfare or me or of my family and friends.  I believe that the majority of Americans would take the same stand as me.  Although I view this invasion of civil liberties unjust, there is not much else I should expect from a country that underwent the most severe terroristic attack in history. With regards to trying to keep our country terrorist free and safe, I understand the government’s position and actions, but it makes me wonder how far this invasion of civil liberties can go and how many of our rights can be taken away from us.




	

















Works Cited
Lane, Charles. “Restricting Civil Liberties vs. Fighting Against Terror.” Pittsburgh Post- 
	Gazette. September 11, 2002.
