Name Name
Paper #2

My American Dream

        The American Dream stands as a constant in America, and yet this dream means something different to everyone. There are many parts of this dream that we know to be understood, but these notions of fact are still interpreted very differently. What is the American Dream? What is my American Dream? I do not think of this dream as a standard for living. It is not a physical outline for us all to follow. My American dream is one that is ever changing; a dream that encompasses my hopes for change and my desire to make our world better.
	My fellow countrymen see the dream as a goal or station in life. Once they meet this goal, they are on top of everyone else who is still trying to achieve it. Capital gain is how they compare one other. Money is not only the physical currency; it is the means of judging your success towards the American Dream. I believe that Americans see the dream as a stereotype of wealth and prosperity. The cliché vision of white picket fences and 2.5 kids may also apply, but the root of their dream is complete economic stability and freedom. 
	I have been raised up through this “Economic American Dream.” My parents strive to achieve this economic level, and they will continue to reach for it until the day they retire. They work each week for the piece of paper that adds to their bank account. The money is then divided into completing parts of their dream. Our home, automobiles, and material possessions are all paid for with their week of work. After the bills are paid, they are left with little to put away for their future; thus retirement seems a long way away. My family’s life is dedicated and built around the principles of this dream. This is simply how my parents live life because it is their means of survival. My family, as well as many other American families, is trapped within an American Nightmare. 
	There is no question the “Economic American Dream” has been trickled down into my system. I have natural tendencies towards the ways of my family, but I also have visions supplied to me by youth and idealism that I grip tight to my sole. In my mind, the American Dream is a far greater peak to reach than just economic stability. We must support ourselves as well as our family, but our dream does not have to follow this path. What about solving hunger in America? What about solving environmental issues? What about racism and bigotry? I would much rather dream lofty thoughts of changing more than just my status in life. I want to better our country and our world.  
	Our dreams must take the outlook of a child. I remember my days of pretending the living room was a commando fort; blankets and pillows strategically placed to hide me from my parents. I also remember loftily dreaming of adventures and toys I didn’t have. My thoughts were pure and unbiased. I dreamed without restraint. Why hold back on our ambitions in life, especially on our prized “American Dream?” “Keep true to the dreams of thy youth” (Friedrich von Schiller 1759 - 1805).
        The bottom line is The American Dream is not and should not be dictated by others. The fact that I am an American, and I dream, makes whatever I desire an American Dream. I will not allow the stereotype to overrun my true desires. I will not allow other people’s dreams to control my life. There is much more out there for us to dream about rather than selfish dreams of success. I do not mean to say that quests for bettering ourselves and the lives around us are not okay. I only feel that this quest is automatic within us. The question is, are you willing to dream a prefabricated story, or are you willing to look inside yourself for your true desires?
