	
Paper #3
	Security vs. Civil Liberties
      On September 11, 2001, the United States witnessed one of the most horrifying attacks on our beloved nation in history. The events which occurred on this tragic day, left an impact on the nation as well as every individual American. After the attack of September 11th, the Nation felt that necessary precautions needed to be taken into account for dealing with terrorism in the future. Our reactions as individuals and the measures enforced by our nation and government in improving terrorism, have subjected Americans into surrendering their individual liberties for the sake of national security. 
      
      The aftermath of September 11, 2001, forced the government into signing the United States Patriot Act  into law. This specific bill gives the federal government questionable new powers to pursue and apprehend terrorists. Even though the bill is an attempt to eradicate terrorism from the world, it interferes with our civil liberties. Before September 11th, Americans would have never conceived the idea of surrendering their civil liberties for terrorism. As soon as the World trade Center was destroyed, Americans reshaped their own values and beliefs for fear of their lives being in jeopardy. When the attack was all over on that tragic morning in September, many families lost loved ones, and the whole nation expressed their grievances and concerns. Most Americans will admit, that they will do all in their power in seeing that their families are safe from harm. For some Americans the sacrifice of civil liberties may never be comprehendible. However, for the majority of the nation life is too precious to waste at any age, even if it means giving up certain civil liberties for the sake of our protection. As Meg has claimed, “A May survey by the institute for Social Research at the university of Michigan found seven out of 10 Americans willing to give up at least some of their civil liberties to improve security” (McConahey). This statistic clearly shows that most Americans are willing to bend their civil liberties to some extent, especially for a safe environment for themselves and their families. Americans must come to realize that they cannot let their emotions interfere with the notion of what’s right and wrong, they are willingly surrendering their liberties to help the government take action against terrorism. If we, as Americans react with our emotions instead of our principles, then we will keep losing our entitled liberties. The founding fathers of the Constitution would have frowned upon our actions, both as a nation and as individuals.  
      
      The founding fathers designed  the Constitution to provide Americans with distinct rights and freedoms, which together formed our American civil liberties. If these civil liberties are infringed upon and tampered with, then the building blocks which make our nation different from all other nations, are in dire trouble. Our nation has come to be known as the land of the free. A wide and diverse group of people left other countries to become citizens of the United States, either to escape persecution or for basic freedom. Everything our nation has stood for in the past will become to be known as a figment of our imagination, if our civil liberties’ keep disappearing. Security is one of the most important commodities in American culture, but if we can’t keep control of our guaranteed freedoms and rights, then how can we feel safe from harm. We are sacrificing our civil liberties for security against terrorism and yet, those liberties are what makes up security within our lives. If Americans would just take time to consider their actions, they would begin to realize that their sacrificing one kind of security for another. Therefore, in all actuality they are losing more than their gaining. Americans want to see the end of terrorism, but the measures in which the government may carry-out in order for seeing  terrorism controlled have too much leeway. The government’s control must be limited in order for our civil liberties to remain intact and also to conserve our rights and freedoms which are expressed in the text of the Constitution. 
      Americans will gradually keep losing their civil liberties, unless they stop letting their emotions cloud their judgement and character. The result of September 11, 2001 has placed a profound impact on the Americans, as well as the nation itself. It has led to the creation of the Patriot Act, and strict measures in national security. These measures that were created for the well-being of all Americans, have interfered with the basic rights and freedoms in which the Constitution entails.  In catastrophes such as September 11th, Americans must come together as a nation  to take initiative, and in doing so we don’t necessarily have to surrender are basic liberties for the protection of our people. As a nation, however,  we do have to limit the amount of control the government has over our liberties. If we don’t act soon, and save our principles in which are founding fathers of the Constitution have created for the protection of our rights, then the offspring of Americans everywhere may be deprived of the basic liberties which have made up our heritage and principles in the past.  
         

      
      
            

       


	Works Cited
McConahey, Meg. “September 11 Remembered: Higher Security Tests Civil Liberties.” The Press Democrat. 8 Sept. 2002. 21 Oct. 2003 <http://www.pressdemocrat.com/911/stories/08liberty_a1empirea.html> 


      

