####
 Thank you Pete. Last April the Council forwarded to the
University Government Committee a resolution that had been proposed petitioning
the Board of Trustees to amend the Trustee policies paragraph dealing with
procedures after a faculty member is dismissed. The special report that you
should have received and have in your materials is the University Government
Committee's recommendation regarding that original resolution and it's in the
form of a substitute resolution which embodies the substance of the original
resolution. The original resolution recommended changing the trustee policies to
something similar to the language of the model from the AAUP and the main thing
the University Government Committee did was to put that language into a form
that's consistent with the existing trustee policies. The substantive change in
the trustee policies that is recommended is to provide another step of
communication between the Faculty Hearings Committee and the chancellor in the
event that the chancellor, upon receiving the recommendation from the hearings
committee, disagrees with it and intends to make a decision contrary to what the
Hearings Committee recommended. So as rewritten, as you can see, it now says that
if the chancellor intends to disagree, to act contrary to the Hearing Committee's
recommendation, before doing that the chancellor would communicate to the
Hearings Committee his intention of doing that and the reasons for it. That would
give the hearings committee an opportunity to respond to the chancellor, to
reconsider its decision and, if it felt necessary even to receive new evidence. 
The recommendation went through several drafts and the University Government
Committee decided not to require that that exchange be in writing, leaving open
the possibility that the chancellor and the committee might even sit down and
talk to each other. Part of this is to get the trustee policies in conformity
with the recommended policies of the AAUP. The other is to take into account the
limitation of the written word and to be sure that before such an important
decision is made whether it's in favor of or against a faculty member that the
communication between the chancellor and the committee is as complete as it can
be. So, as chair of the University Government Committee, I would move the
adoption of the substitution resolution unless Joe has a procedural instruction
other than that, and invite any questions or comments you have.

####
 Pete, I'd be happy just to have that received since it's the same
as our special report unless anyone has questions.

