
Name Name
Paper #4 

	Working is something that teaches, enhances gains, loses, and supports people. Working does many different things to different people. Working can drive people to do things, both good and bad. It pressures people and it gives people a place to focus and release the other pressures that life throws at us. Work can be whatever we make of it but sometimes is forced to be negative because of different peoples’ preference.
	Working is something that is a part of life’s cycle that we go through. We work to make money, so that we can survive and support our lives. Is that the only reason? Some people work because it gives them something to ground their life. Working or a job puts security in people’s lives. It is something that they can depend on for the most part. 
        Working is something that some people take as a way to accomplish things. Many people take pride in their work and make it their life. Their life revolves around their work. They live, sleep, and eat their work until it is perfect. People with these morals are ideal workers. As years pass we lose more and more people with these morals. People do the bare minimum to get the dollars that they need to survive. Not many people still have pride in what they do, or in the product of their work.
        In past years quite a long time ago there were people that took pride in everything they did, especially their work. Workers such as carpenters, painters, factory workers, and many other guildsmen, put everything they had into their work. They would put blood, sweat, tears, and most importantly time into their work. It was about pride and respect that they made sure things were perfect in what they produced. People may say that there are still workers of this stature, and there is. Yet they are hard to find. Current day as produced something that no one should be proud of. We have produced money hungry people who focus more on the sale than the actual product. We have produced people who do not take pride in their work, just in that someone compensates them for their work. What makes a great worker these days are the ability to sell not creates. 
        People work now to survive and buy things that make their enhance their life, or at least they believe it enhances their life. What drives people to work now is mostly money. The Majority of people working do not usually enjoy their jobs. At least it is not their passion. Everyone in life has a passion or vocation. Something that they were made to do, or at least they think they were made to do. Something that they feel is what they should do in life. Not many people follow their callings. Many people do not even discover their calling. Yet the people who find and pursue their calling enjoy life to the fullest. People who can follow their calling and love their life can be very successful at what they do because they are happy to put in a lot of effort and time. So working can be positive in that people love what they do, while providing a great living for themselves. 
        Working in America has become so competitive that good, well paying jobs are less common. So therefore the matches of people to their correct callings are very small. Competition has raised the bar of employment. Now most quality jobs are taken by the college degree holders. In a way this raises quality of peoples work because they are forced to produce quality work in order to keep their job. Now there are more people to replace people at their position. This strengthens the fact that the quality is not peoples’ first priority anymore, it is income. Greed has taken over, and quality lies beneath. 
        Working will always be more of a chore than an enjoyment. Yet there are the more fortunate people who discover and pursue their calling. These people care, have pride, and produce quality work that benefits more people then themselves. Quality work that people can take pride in is something that runs rare anymore. Yet there are the few that still produce this type work. Pride in your work is something that all should have. It is something that elevates the respect of the customer. It is something that all people will be pulled to and something that all people of the workforce should have.      
             
	  
    
