Paper #2

Dreaming as a Family

	When discussing the American dream many different ideals can be presented depending on who is voicing their opinion.  Many Americans would say the key aspects of the American dream are things like wealth, opportunity, and freedom.  For me, the idea is a bit more personal.  The so called “perfect” family illustrates my idea of what living the American dream really is.  In some countries there are restrictions as to how many children each family is allowed to have.  Babies born of the “wrong” gender are looked down on.  The freedoms we are granted from living in America provide all people of our nation the opportunity to share in my idea of the American dream.  I consider Americans lucky that we live in a place where the love of a family can determine how many children it has as opposed to governmental restrictions or quotas, so I intend to take advantage of that.
	The perfect example of a family living the American dream can be found right in my own home.  In a suburb of a small city my family lives at the end of a street lined with other houses just like it.  It is the picture of the typical American neighborhood.  Our driveway accommodates three new cars that my father worked hard for, and a basketball hoop that usually provides entertainment for all the young boys of the neighborhood after school is out.  On the bumpers of my mother and father’s cars are stickers indicating honors that both my brother and I received all through high school.  The hard work ethics instilled in both of us come from our parents.  From the time we were small children my mother taught us never to settle for less than what we want.  If we were ever in want of something there was constant reassurance that with the right amount of determination it was not out of reach.  By following the example my father set for us by creating his own business we also learned to have willpower.  Self confidence is another characteristic that my family has shown to be very important to achieve success.  I have always been told that there is nothing out of my grasp.  Living the American dream is evidence that statement truly possible.  Besides our work ethic the love and support of an American family like my own is crucial to obtain what I classify as the American dream.
	Wealth, opportunity, power and freedom are some of the dreams of people from every country.  They are not exclusive to only Americans.  Although these elements are imperative for a family to structure itself around, it takes more than just these things to truly experience the American dream.  All things are good in moderation.  Some wealth is necessary to insure the happiness of a family.  Power and prestige are also things that people all over the world dream of but are not true necessities.  The opportunities we are presented with in America because of our freedom are endless.  With all these elements present some things are still missing from the mold of a perfect family.  Things like love, pride, discipline, and the drive to always do better are also necessary to be successful in life.  Without a strong foundation of all these elements this lifestyle can be hard to come by.  In my “dream family” all these aspects are present in everyday life.  Since all families living in our country today are so lucky to have the opportunity to provide their children with all types of things there is no reason for failing to try to provide these things.
        Beginning several centuries ago individuals like Martin Luther King, Jr., Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln stood up and fought for the rights of all Americans.  The least the American people could do in return for them is to show our appreciation through the way we live our lives.  By the American people of today living a successful life and utilizing our freedoms they once fought for, I believe that in itself is giving something back to them.  For the future my dream is to make a life for my children similar to the life my parents built for me.  With everything available today to the citizens of America, my dream would be for my children to take advantage of every opportunity they are afforded.  The American dream I believe in is based on strong family relationships, self confidence, and hard work.  While everyone has their own dreams, if all Americans utilize everything our nation has to offer everyone can achieve what they wish for.
