

“American Dream”

	“I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America”.  Would we say the pledge of allegiance if we didn’t have faith that we could fulfill our dreams here?  The “American Dream” means something different to everyone.  It ranges from opportunities to freedom.  To Martin Luther King Jr. the “American Dream” meant equal rights not only for blacks, but for all groups of people that did not have the same benefits as whites.  Andrew Carnegie on the other hand saw the “American Dream” as striving to be on top, and once one is there, he should share his wealth with lower classes so they can also be successful.  The “American Dream” gives everyone the opportunity to go after what they feel is most important to them.
	The “American Dream” to me personally means having freedom, opportunities, and pride.  Living in America gives me the freedom to fulfill my dreams without being tied down by someone of higher power than myself.  The opportunities I have experienced really have made me who I am.  Without the chance for an education, travel, and without the opportunity to express myself, I wouldn’t be who I am today.  My personal dream is to grow up and have a house, family, education, teaching job, and to most of all be successful and proud of my accomplishments.  I have pride in myself as well as my country and I am grateful to be able to have dreams that can come true.
	Society’s definition of the “American Dream” is similar to my own but also a little different.  Many immigrants in the past as well as today saw America as “the land of opportunity”.  Whether they were looking for the chance to work, have better living conditions, or simply just being capable of having liberty and freedom they all were looking for ways to better themselves.  Many people to this day have the dream of equality.  Homosexuals are just one example of people looking for equal rights.  To them, that is their “American Dream”.  They hope to be able to express themselves as they wish, without intervention from the government or society.  The pursuit of happiness is what the “American Dream” is to most.  Your dreams are like a fairytale with nothing in the way of your felicitousness.
	The “American Dream” is also present in my family.  To most people, I have an “ideal” family since both of my parents are together, they have a child, and a pet.  In 1963, when Martin Luther King Jr. wrote his “I Have a Dream Speech”, my family would also have been looked upon as an ideal family for the same reasons as above, but mainly for the simple fact that we are white.  In today’s society the definition of an ideal family varies from person to person.  My parents both had the opportunity to go to school and my mother even had the chance to go to college.  My family no longer lives in Europe because my ancestors wanted the chance to experience the “American Dream” and for their future generations to do so as well.
	In me personally the “American Dream” is also present.  For being an eighteen year old female, I have many opportunities that some people have never experienced in a life time, especially women.  I’ve been able to travel, dance, get an education, be active in school, and also pursue my dream of studying at Duquesne and being a part of the world renowned Duquesne University Tamburitzans.  I am also very fortunate to be able to dress how I want and to have my own car.  To many these luxuries seem impossible, but with the “American Dream” your possibilities are endless.
	The crucial elements to the “American Dream” are opportunities and equality.  Without these two important factors my definition, society’s definition, my family, and myself would not be what they are today and the term “American Dream” would not exist.  We are very lucky to live in the “land of the free” and to experience “liberty and justice for all”.
