

Liberty
	 The United States of America is known as the “land of the free and the home of the brave.”  Here we are free to strive for anything we can think of, and we will prevent anyone from attempting to take our reputation for being a dominant country away from us.  The liberties we receive as Americans are privileges that we cherish and take great pride in possessing.  These qualities are reasons immigrants over the past hundreds of years have migrated to America and are why they continue to do so today.  American liberty is not something you buy at the store, for it is a property that is innate in every citizen from birth and will not be surrendered under any circumstance.
	On September 11, 2001, I remember being in my eleventh grade A.P. English class and receiving the news of terrorist attacks on our nation.  I will always remember where I was and the somber feelings I felt when I heard of the horrible acts performed on our country.  I am sure that every other American will be able to do the same, for we have all experienced a day that will go in our history books forever.  Despite American sadness across the nation, it was time to show our bravery and to get revenge on our intruders.  Before we knew it we were at war.  Since we take pride in our country as well as our liberties we will not let anyone try to capture that away from us for any reason what so ever.  We will do everything we can to uphold our country’s status as the most dominant and powerful nation in the world.
	When America experienced a downfall on September 11, 2001 our government and our people did everything they could to rebuild.  President George W. Bush in cooperation with Congress invested money into creating national security for our nation, and put former Pennsylvania governor, Tom Ridge in charge.  National security was put in force in order to protect American citizens from attacks by terrorists.  In doing this, President Bush had made it capable for us to be safe and cautious of what was going on in the world.  Our individual liberties were not surrendered in order for this precaution to take place, for without it we could lose our freedom from bondage and captivity to a clan of terrorists jealous of our belongings.  Our individual liberties are presented to us from the day we are born till the day we die and it will take a lot more than a group of terrorists to take that away from us.
	In order to insure our safety and reputation, we will not surrender to anyone.  At the time of the attacks we may have felt a little scared or in fact even worried, but we fought back for what is ours.  By participating in the acts of national security we showed how important our liberties and freedoms are to us and how important it is to express this.  By displaying the American flag and singing the national anthem, they are just a few examples of how we express our freedoms and liberties.  Liberty is a sacred gift that no one can take away unless we do not cherish it with all our hearts.
	America, like every country, has experienced times of happiness as well as times of hardships.  In order to prevent future hardships, we put our faith in our government that they will point us in the right direction to bettering our country.  These officials have the power to better our country and are in no means intenders of creating a weak country.  The liberties we have as Americans are the reasons we fight so hard for our country and will not surrender to anyone.  Unlike a communist nation, we are happy and proud of our country and we will put forth all our efforts to insure this.  That does not mean we are surrendering, it just means we are working hard to keep our liberties and are willing to fight for what is ours.  Despite the hard times we experience as Americans we always hold true to what our anthem states; “one nation under God indivisible with liberty and justice for all.”
	
