Name Name
Paper #5


	Warm, sunny, and clear blue skies are the setting of the day. People outside in the quad, conversing about their weekend, no idea what was in store for the rest of the day. Suddenly confusion, madness, fright, and sadness filled the faces of everyone. The day was September 11, 2001. 
	After sadness passed, anger came. We are angry and feel way beyond violated. We deploy in 3 weeks. We will not sit back and be innocently attacked. Yet we all do not feel this way. We are all united in a way that has never happened before, yet we cannot agree on one thing. We all need to back our family, the American family. We need someone to step up and guide us in our thoughts, travels, and fights.
	At the same time this even is unifying us, it is separating us in opinion. Many say we should defend ourselves and seek revenge on those responsible. This would show the persons responsible who we are as a nation and as a unified people. We could send our troops to defend us, and to take all things that make events like this possible from the enemy. We must send these people to show that we can not be violated in such a violent matter. We cannot be walked over because out citizens are what makes us the great nation we are. 
	Yet there is also another option that not many want to flirt with. We can sit back and take this attack as a learning opportunity. We can be the peaceful side of an attack that has scarred our nation forever. We can leave the mark or blemish on out flag that was put there by the people involved with this attack. We need a leader to tell us what to do? How to act? There is one leader that will and can lead us through any hard time that we encounter in our life.  
	Dear Lord,
		You have witnessed and felt our pain in this time of suffering. You have taken our friends, family, and fellow citizens to your home where you will take care of them. We find our selves in a predicament. We are between retaliation and peace. Not just retaliation but justice. We are united in our hearts yet divided in our minds. Please help us to realize our destiny. Help us to make a decision that can benefit our Nation, our World, and most important human kind itself. If we do act on our feelings, guide us to safety. Help us to stay united so that we will live and die together. Stand by us so that we feel your wisdom, love, and power. We feel confident with your decisions and guidance. We love and cherish you as our leader. 
								AMEN.     
