Name Name
Paper #4
Work

	Work is a way of life.  It is a person’s means of livelihood or source of income and a source of social status.  Work does not only include the physical effort necessary to achieve certain goals, but also the mental effort.  Labor, duties, and responsibilities are parts of work as well.   In today’s society, work is necessary in order to survive.  Unfortunately, not everyone is given equal opportunities in the workplace.  Women, for example, are often the center of this type of discrimination.  Even today, some people believe that women cannot accomplish the same tasks as men.  I plan to overcome this discrimination and work as a physical therapist after college using the skills and techniques that I have collected from my family and also from my education.  
	As mentioned earlier, work is a person’s means of livelihood or source of income.  This income is then used to provide for one’s self and one’s family.  Shelter, food, and clothing can all be bought with the income from one’s work.  These items are all necessary to survive, which in turn means that work is also necessary for survival.  Work is not just a source of income, but also a source of social status.  In today’s society, people assign certain rankings to particular lines of work.  For example, people involved in medicine or law are usually regarded as people of high social status, while people involved in sanitary engineering or janitorial services are usually assigned a lower social ranking.  
        Unfortunately, the assignment of social status is not the only discriminatory act in the workplace.  Women are also subject to discrimination.  They are not given the same opportunities as men in the workplace.  Some people continue to believe that women are not capable of holding similar positions or accomplishing similar tasks to men.  As a result, women are often turned down from certain jobs or excluded from particular assignments.  Even though this discrimination is diminishing, it still exists and will undoubtedly continue to exist in the future.  
        After college, I plan to work as a physical therapist.  I have always wanted to be a member of the medical field because both of my parents, my father, an orthopaedic surgeon, and my mother, a registered nurse, are also members.  I wish to provide for myself as well as for my future family.  Work is one way that I will be able to accomplish that goal.  I realize that work requires both physical and mental efforts.  I plan to use the skills and techniques that I have collected from my family and also from my education in order to carry out my duties and responsibilities.  These skills and techniques include determination, organization, and patience.  Hopefully, I will be given equal opportunities in the workplace, so that I am capable of succeeding and surviving in today’s society.
        Work is a person’s source of income or means of livelihood.  It includes one’s responsibilities, duties, and labor.  In order to survive in today’s society, it is necessary to work.  The assignment of social status is also due to one’s work, although this is not the only type of discrimination in the workplace.  Equal opportunities are not given to all people, especially women.  One reason for this discrimination is the long-standing belief that women cannot accomplish the same tasks as men.  Fortunately, this inequality is persistently diminishing, but will most likely continue in the future. 
        
        
