Name Name
Paper #2

        The American Dream is whatever hopes and aspirations any American has for the events or outcome of their life. The American dream was once definable but now has endless meaning depending on the dream’s beholder. The average American dream has changed and continues to change with technology and time.
	The true American dream or at least the dream that represents America best was Martin Luther King Jr’s dream. His dream was for the black man to be equal to every other accepted man in America. He wanted to attain respect, equality, and most importantly brotherhood. King’s “Dream” speech was moving to all Americans across the nation. It represented the black race, and exposed America for what it was. It told people what was desired by the black race, and what we were supposed to do about it. King’s dream is not exactly everyone’s definition of the American dream, yet it is the backbone of what American is supposed to stand for. America, “a nation united”, “the city of brotherly love”, “united we stand, divided we fall,” are all phrases we relate to America or places in America. Our strong nation, is supposed to be one of freedom and liberty, and took a huge step towards after King’s speech. The strength of his words, and the heart he put into them, made a nation changing impact. 
	Beyond leaders like King, the citizens of America have their own dreams. I have my own dream. My family has their own dream. My family’s American dream is to progress and continually surpass the each generation. Though not always successful, our family continues, and will continue to attempt to become successful and carry the family name. Our dream, or so I am taught, is to have people respect, trust, and rely on me. My Dad’s dream, which I feed from, was to make his own way in life. It is the most respectable thing a man can do with his life. He started off working his way up in a legal company and currently owns his own trucking business. For a dream to come true, you must sacrifice, work hard, and have desire. My family’s dream is not complicated, it is something all American’s desire. The difference with our dream is that you accomplish things on your own, and experience things and learn. 
	My dream is the same as my family’s dream. Though I differ in one way, I dream of success in different ways. I dream of success as a Nation and not just as a family. Or a Nation as a family. I would like to feel as a part of this nation, as I did after September 11th. After September 11th the nation was one, we were united in a way that would be impossible to capture again without tragedy. A large part of my life involves unity. In family, country, team, and school, I search for unity in the all the members of that group. Unity holds things and people together and provides a strength that carries things to a new level. The American dream to me, King, and to whoever else shares opinion, is about Unity.
	The American dream is unable to be defined in one exact definition. Everyone has their own definition and own desires. People in America have dreams. I have dreams. The American dream is what you make of it, what you put into it, and what you take out of it.   
	       
 
