Essay 2	

Achieving the American Dream	

	Everyone has personal dreams and goals that they pursue throughout their lifetimes.  These dreams are often impacted by the person’s current standard of living and their culture.  For example, subsistent farmers in African tribes are going to have a much different dream than that of a college student living in the United States.  The typical American dream is to be rich and to have a big, happy family.  Living in America, the land of opportunity, I have realized that my dream is to finish college and find happiness whether with another person, my family, or through a successful career.  My American dream is not as specific as the typical American dream because I feel that life is a journey, not a destination.  I have many goals for myself; however, they are things that will help me to grow as a person, not just ensure wealth and success.   There are three major elements to the American dream: finding out what is important to you, making decisions, and overcoming disappointments.
	To create an American dream a person must first find out what their values are, what they would like to accomplish, and where they can see themselves in the future.  My sister, Katie, has always been a very competitive athlete.  These values were easy for her to fulfill throughout high school and college because she always played on sports teams.  When she finished college, Katie needed something to focus on so she could be physically fit and have an athletic goal.  One of her goals was to become a tri-athlete.  This was a large commitment of time, as well as and mental and physical toughness. As a result of believing in her goal, she knew she could bind herself to it.  One of my values is to not measure success by material wealth.  Having this value and staying true to it will help me to accomplish my dreams of finding something that makes me truly happy.  
	Throughout life, making decisions can completely change the path a person’s life will take.  Making the choice of what a person wants to be when they “grow up” is probably one of the most important decisions of their life.  My brother, Andy, got hurt when he was in the ninth grade.  He remained on crutches for six months and after those six months he made the decision that he wanted to become a physical therapist.  Since he was fifteen he worked towards his dream of becoming a physical therapist and now that he achieved this goal, he can work on others he sets for himself.  If he had not made that decision, he may not have had the opportunity to find the career he loved.  The most important decision of my life was made last spring when I decided which college to attend.  I knew I must choose a school that would test my intelligence, physical abilities, and make me grow as a person.  I had the opportunity to attend a school that was closer to home with a less competitive lacrosse team and less academically challenging classes.  However, I chose Duquesne because I knew it would help me achieve my goals in life and grow as a person.  
	Setbacks, illness, death, and disappointments are part of life that will always remain as obstacles.  People have learned to overcome these defeats and frustrations to achieve their dreams.  My sister Katie, the tri-athlete, was diagnosed with hypoglycemia and a heart murmur shortly after she began training for her first triathlon.  This diagnosis was a huge setback because on top of physical training and working, she had to completely change her diet so she would be able to compete.  My American dream seems easy to fulfill; however, I know I need to make smart choices that will benefit me.  I know I cannot take the easy road through life.  Although I have not had to face a major impediment in my journey through life, I am prepared to face it.
	American dreams are all unique.  The most common mistake in creating an American dream is for a person to believe that something trivial is important to them.  When people work hard and are persistent in achieving their goals, their appreciation for reaching their dream will be much greater.
