Name Name

Paper #1

Expansion Throughout the Country


           The term Turner used, “expansive”, is one word to perfectly describe the American psyche(518). All Americans live their life with hope of expanding. No American wants to remain at the same rank they have as a child. They want to evolve and graduate up to a higher level. Americans evolution leads them to be in a search to be Renaissance men and women. Americans seek to have knowledge in all topics and grow throughout their lives. A destination of forward progress is inherited to us from generation to generation. An innate sense of advancement is what makes that destination attainable. Since this country was founded,  people have had the urge to succeed and enjoy continued success. Also more people are enrolled in college because they are in search for a better life. People are attending college so they have better income which is from their higher education. It is also true because people want to become enlightened scholars and gain more knowledge.  Americans are constantly growing and expanding and we have shown that through political, social and environmental manners. 				

      First, Americans have spread in a political manner. America has been involved in constant expansion due to the colonization and the breaking away from England. Not only is our own judicial system evolving and changing to fit the times more appropriately, but also we are branching to help other countries improve their situation. Our system evolves with the rights of the citizen in mind and what is best for the majority of the population. It is set up to be as fair as possible and serve the American public in the best ways possible. America is currently involved in Iraq in an attempt to remove their current regime and dictator from power. America participates with hopes of bettering countries. Americans believe that we are simply trying to spread the thought of democracy, not just because it is our way of life but because it is a better way of life for those citizens. 
      Our second way of expansion is that Americans have spread in a social manner. We now have what is called cyberspace. Mass amounts of information can be accessed with a simple click of a mouse. You can do anything you could possibly want to do from behind a desk. Communication is evolving because of this fact. Phones can be unnecessary for some people if they have the internet. Not only can mail now be attained via e-mail, but also your taxes can be completed online as well. It takes out the personal relationship in some instances and removes person to person interaction. But during the fast times of American life people feel that they do not have the time to mess with certain instances and must handle it this way to take on more tasks in their everyday lives. Another example of social expansion is that when America assists in third world countries they help that country become more socially advanced than they were before. This in turn continues the spreading of knowledge world wide. 
      Thirdly, Americans have spread through environmental challenges. During the 60's we ventured into outer space. This was to seek the unknown and have a better understanding of our planet. Some things researched in outer space has bettered life here on Earth. Certain subjects
 can be related and can result in remedies for ailments on Earth. We are also taking part in 
oceanic exploration. Certain subjects researched  in the ocean can also be related back to land. We are searching how different types of life can survive in different surroundings and what each one may require. 

      In conclusion Americans like to leave nothing behind them. Americans seek for greater knowledge and better grasps on certain subjects. If countries need assistance we do not like to leave them behind. We take up opportunities to help them and make life better for them in the long run. Americans do not do this for domination, we do it in search of a better surrounding. 
We do not wish for people to despise us for our advances but to look at us as an example and see how we achieved it and achieve it for their country as well. Americans search to know about all subjects not for domination also, but for an ability to help more people and solve more problems. 
