Essay 3

Security or Sovereignty?

	In a world of terrorism, suicide bombings, the 2002 sniper, 9/11 attacks, tyrants, biological warfare and civil war in third world countries, the United States Government has made it their primary goal to insure homeland security in America.  Many new laws and safety measurements have been enacted over the last two years to locate possible terrorists in and out of the United States and to keep those who could be a threat out of the country.  These include tighter airport security and closer surveillance of people entering and leaving the country.  The steps the government has taken to achieve a sense of safety has caused national crisis and dispute because the rights of the citizens are being restricted.  Many civil rights groups are angry at the direction the government is moving and feel American civil liberties are being surrendered for the sake of safety.  This makes many Americans wonder if they value their safety or their civil liberties more.  Because of the national precautions being taken by the government, the civil liberties of American citizens are being relinquished. 
	Freedom and civil liberties are the key factors in America’s framing of the constitution and the American way of life.  Throughout the 20th century, protecting civil liberties has been the topic of many major events in America.  From 1910 to the late 1920’s women fought for their right to vote and were eventually able to get jobs and work in the government.  In the early 1960’s, African Americans peacefully fought to gain the civil liberties that they were being denied.  In the latter 1960’s during the Vietnam War, men and women were advocating the right to not be drafted in a war they felt was unjust.  The political views of Americans are influenced by events taking place around the world whether the effects are direct or indirect.  The American government also makes rules and regulations that are reflective upon what is happening around the world.  These can be as minor as raising taxes or as major as the government getting involved in a civil war in another country such as the Vietnam War or the War in Afghanistan.        
	An example of the strict regulations being enforced by the government that is effecting the rights of American citizens is the USA PATRIOT Act.  The PATRIOT Act is one of the most controversial regulations that have been enacted since the 9/11 attacks in 2001.  Many critics argue that it attacks the Bill of Rights and disregards the fourth and fifth amendments.  Among the many things the PATRIOT Act does, it allows the government to issue wiretaps and monitor the use of the internet and public libraries.  It also allows the release of search warrants without providing evidence that the person is under investigation of anything.  
        The USA PATRIOT Act was created to catch criminals.  So why would law-abiding citizens be afraid of the PATRIOT Act unless they had something to hide?  The answer is simple; Americans are afraid that the government will abuse the power it has recently received.   The framers of the constitution also had this fear when they were creating the constitution over 200 years ago and they addressed it by creating a series of checks and balances.  However, the USA PATRIOT Act disregards these checks and balances and makes Americans put their entire trust into the hands of the government.  These restrictions effect every American’s privacy and god-given natural rights.  With regulations like the USA PATRIOT Act, the country may be safer but the rights of the American citizen’s are being restricted.  
        However harsh the situation may be right now, there is light at the end of the tunnel.  As time goes on, world events will change and lead the country on other paths with other dangers.  Although there will always be terrorism, America’s current situation is only temporary.  Even over the past 2 years since 9/11, the government and country as a whole have relaxed and are not as uptight as they used to be.  The current regulations will eventually be just another part of American history.
