INDUCTION.

THE STAGE.

AFTER THE SECOND SOUNDING.

ENTER THREE OF THE CHILDREN, STRUGGLING.

1 CHILD.  Pray you away; why, fellows!  Gods so, what do you mean? 

2 CHILD.  Marry, that you shall not speak the prologue sir.  

3 CHILD.  Why, do you hope to speak it? 

2 CHILD.  Ay, and I think I have most right to it: I am sure I 
studied it first.  

3 CHILD.  That's all one, if the author think I can speak it 
better.  

1 CHILD.  I plead possession of the cloak: gentles, your suffrages, 
I pray you.  

[WITHIN.]  Why children! are you not ashamed? come in there.  

3 CHILD.  Slid, I'll play nothing in the play: unless I speak it.  

1 CHILD.  Why, will you stand to most voices of the gentlemen? let 
that decide it.  

3 CHILD.  O, no, sir gallant; you presume to have the start of us 
there, and that makes you offer so prodigally.  

1 CHILD.  No, would I were whipped if I had any such thought; try 
it by lots either.  

2 CHILD.  Faith, I dare tempt my fortune in a greater venture than 
this.  

3 CHILD.  Well said, resolute Jack! I am content too; so we draw 
first. Make the cuts.  

1 CHILD.  But will you not snatch my cloak while I am stooping? 

3 CHILD.  No, we scorn treachery.  

2 CHILD.  Which cut shall speak it? 

3 CHILD.  The shortest.  

1 CHILD.  Agreed: draw.  [THEY DRAW CUTS.]  The shortest is come 
to the shortest.  Fortune was not altogether blind in this.  Now, 
sir, I hope I shall go forward without your envy.  

2 CHILD.  A spite of all mischievous luck!  I was once plucking at 
the other.  

3 CHILD.  Stay Jack: 'slid I'll do somewhat now afore I go in, 
though it be nothing but to revenge myself on the author; since I 
speak not his prologue, I'll go tell all the argument of his play 
afore-hand, and so stale his invention to the auditory, before it 
come forth.  

1 CHILD.  O, do not so.  

2 CHILD.  By no means.  

3 CHILD. [ADVANCING TO THE FRONT OF THE STAGE.]  First, the title 
of his play is "Cynthia's Revels," as any man that hath hope to be 
saved by his book can witness; the scene, Gargaphie, which I do 
vehemently suspect for some fustian country; but let that vanish. 
Here is the court of Cynthia whither he brings Cupid travelling on 
foot, resolved to turn page.  By the way Cupid meets with Mercury, 
(as that's a thing to be noted); take any of our play-books without 
a Cupid or a Mercury in it, and burn it for an heretic in poetry.  
-- [IN THESE AND THE SUBSEQUENT SPEECHES, AT EVERY BREAK, THE OTHER 
TWO INTERRUPT, AND ENDEAVOUR TO STOP HIM.]  Pray thee, let me 
alone.  Mercury, he in the nature of a conjurer, raises up Echo, who 
weeps over her love, or daffodil, Narcissus, a little; sings; 
curses the spring wherein the pretty foolish gentleman melted 
himself away: and there's an end of her. -- Now I am to inform 
you, that Cupid and Mercury do both become pages.  Cupid attends on 
Philautia, or Self-love, a court lady: Mercury follows Hedon, the 
Voluptuous, and a courtier; one that ranks himself even with 
Anaides, or the Impudent, a gallant, and, that's my part; one that 
keeps Laughter, Gelaia, the daughter of Folly, a wench in boy's 
attire, to wait on him -- These, in the court, meet with Amorphus, 
or the deformed, a traveller that hath drunk of the fountain, and
there tells the wonders of the water.  They presently dispatch away
their pages with bottles to fetch of it, and themselves go to visit
the ladies.  But I should have told you -- Look, these emmets put
me out here -- that with this Amorphus, there comes along a
citizen's heir, Asotus, or the Prodigal, who, in imitation of the
traveller, who hath the Whetstone following him, entertains the
Beggar, to be his attendant. -- Now, the nymphs who are mistresses
to these gallants, are Philautia, Self-love; Phantaste, a light
Wittiness; Argurion, Money; and their guardian, mother Moria; or
mistress Folly.  

1 CHILD.  Pray thee, no more.  

3 CHILD.  There Cupid strikes Money in love with the Prodigal, 
makes her dote upon him, give him jewels, bracelets, carcanets, 
etc.  All which he most ingeniously departs withal to be made 
known to the other ladies and gallants; and in the heat of this, 
increases his train with the Fool to follow him, as well as the 
Beggar -- By this time, your Beggar begins to wait close, who is 
returned with the rest of his fellow bottlemen. -- There they all 
drink, save Argurion, who is fallen into a sudden apoplexy -- 

1 CHILD.  Stop his mouth.  

3 CHILD.  And then there's a retired scholar there, you would not 
wish a thing to be better contemn'd of a society of gallants, than 
it is; and he applies his service, good gentleman, to the Lady 
Arete, or Virtue, a poor nymph of Cynthia's train, that's scarce 
able to buy herself a gown; you shall see her play in a black robe 
anon: a creature, that, I assure you, is no less scorn'd than 
himself.  Where am I now? at a stand! 

2 CHILD.  Come, leave at last, yet.

3 CHILD.  O, the night is come ('twas somewhat dark, methought), 
and Cynthia intends to come forth; that helps it a little yet.  All 
the courtiers must provide for revels; they conclude upon a masque, 
the device of which is -- What, will you ravish me? -- that each of 
these Vices, being to appear before Cynthia, would seem other than 
indeed they are; and therefore assume the most neighbouring Virtues 
as their masking habit -- I'd cry a rape, but that you are 
children.  

2 CHILD.  Come, we'll have no more of this anticipation; to give 
them the inventory of their cates aforehand, were the discipline of 
a tavern, and not fitting this presence.  

1 CHILD.  Tut, this was but to shew us the happiness of his memory. 
I thought at first he would have plaid the ignorant critic with 
everything along as he had gone; I expected some such device.  

3 CHILD.  O, you shall see me do that rarely; lend me thy cloak.  

1 CHILD.  Soft sir, you'll speak my prologue in it.  

3 CHILD.  No, would I might never stir then.  

2 CHILD.  Lend it him, lend it him:  

1 CHILD.  Well, you have sworn. [GIVES HIM THE CLOAK.] 

3 CHILD.  I have.  Now, sir; suppose I am one of your genteel 
auditors, that am come in, having paid my money at the door, with 
much ado, and here I take my place and sit down: I have my three 
sorts of tobacco in my pocket, my light by me, and thus I begin. 
[AT THE BREAKS HE TAKES HIS TOBACCO.]  By this light, I wonder that 
any man is so mad, to come to see these rascally tits play here -- 
They do act like so many wrens or pismires -- not the fifth part of 
a good face amongst them all. -- And then their music is abominable 
-- able to stretch a man's ears worse then ten -- pillories and their 
ditties -- most lamentable things, like the pitiful fellows that 
make them -- poets.  By this vapour, an 'twere not for tobacco -- 
I think -- the very stench of 'em would poison me, I should not 
dare to come in at their gates -- A man were better visit fifteen 
jails -- or a dozen or two of hospitals -- than once adventure to 
come near them.  How is't? well? 

1 CHILD.  Excellent; give me my cloak.  

3 CHILD.  Stay; you shall see me do another now: but a more sober, 
or better-gather'd gallant; that is, as it may be thought, some 
friend, or well-wisher to the house: and here I enter.  

1 CHILD.  What? upon the stage too? 

2 CHILD.  Yes; and I step forth like one of the children, and ask 
you.  Would you have a stool sir? 

3 CHILD.  A stool, boy! 

2 CHILD.  Ay, sir, if you'll give me sixpence, I'll fetch you one.  

3 CHILD.  For what, I pray thee? what shall I do with it? 

2 CHILD.  O lord, sir! will you betray your ignorance so much?  
why throne yourself in state on the stage, as other gentlemen use,  
sir.  

3 CHILD.  Away, wag; what would'st thou make an implement of me? 
'Slid, the boy takes me for a piece of perspective, I hold my life, 
or some silk curtain, come to hang the stage here!  Sir crack, I am 
none of your fresh pictures, that use to beautify the decayed dead 
arras in a public theatre.  

2 CHILD.  'Tis a sign, sir, you put not that confidence in your 
good clothes, and your better face, that a gentleman should do, 
sir.  But I pray you sir, let me be a suitor to you, that you will 
quit our stage then, and take a place; the play is instantly to 
begin.  

3 CHILD.  Most willingly, my good wag; but I would speak with your 
author: where is he? 

2 CHILD.  Not this way, I assure you sir; we are not so officiously 
befriended by him, as to have his presence in the tiring-house, to 
prompt us aloud, stamp at the book-holder, swear for our 
properties, curse the poor tireman, rail the music out of tune, and 
sweat for every venial trespass we commit, as some author would, if 
he had such fine enghles as we.  Well, 'tis but our hard fortune! 

3 CHILD.  Nay, crack, be not disheartened.  

2 CHILD.  Not I sir; but if you please to confer with our author, by 
attorney, you may, sir; our proper self here, stands for him.  

3 CHILD.  Troth, I have no such serious affair to negotiate with 
him; but what may very safely be turn'd upon thy trust.  It is in 
the general behalf of this fair society here that I am to speak; 
at least the more judicious part of it: which seems much distasted 
with the immodest and obscene writing of many in their plays. 
Besides, they could wish your poets would leave to be promoters of 
other men's jests, and to way-lay all the stale apothegms, or old 
books they can hear of, in print or otherwise, to farce their 
scenes withal.  That they would not so penuriously glean wit from 
every laundress or hackney-man; or derive their best grace, with 
servile imitation, from common stages, or observation of the 
company they converse with; as if their invention lived wholly 
upon another man's trencher.  Again, that feeding their friends 
with nothing of their own, but what they have twice or thrice 
cooked, they should not wantonly give out, how soon they had drest 
it; nor how many coaches came to carry away the broken meat, 
besides hobby-horses and foot-cloth nags.  

2 CHILD.  So, sir, this is all the reformation you seek? 

3 CHILD.  It is; do not you think it necessary to be practised, my 
little wag? 

2 CHILD.  Yes, where any such ill-habited custom is received.  

3 CHILD.  O (I had almost forgot it too), they say, the umbrae, or 
ghosts of some three or four plays departed a dozen years since, 
have been seen walking on your stage here; take heed boy, if your 
house be haunted with such hobgoblins, 'twill fright away all your 
spectators quickly.  

2 CHILD.  Good, sir; but what will you say now, if a poet, untouch'd 
with any breath of this disease, find the tokens upon you, that are 
of the auditory?  As some one civet-wit among you, that knows no 
other learning, than the price of satin and velvets: nor other 
perfection than the wearing of a neat suit; and yet will censure 
as desperately as the most profess'd critic in the house, presuming 
his clothes should bear him out in it. Another, whom it hath 
pleased nature to furnish with more beard than brain, prunes his 
mustaccio; lisps, and, with some score of affected oaths, swears 
down all that sit about him; "That the old Hieronimo, as it was 
first acted, was the only best, and judiciously penn'd play of 
Europe".  A third great-bellied juggler talks of twenty years 
since, and when Monsieur was here, and would enforce all wits to be 
of that fashion, because his doublet is still so.  A fourth 
miscalls all by the name of fustian, that his grounded capacity 
cannot aspire to.  A fifth only shakes his bottle head, and out of 
his corky brain squeezeth out a pitiful learned face, and is 
silent.  

3 CHILD.  By my faith, Jack, you have put me down: I would I knew 
how to get off with any indifferent grace! here take your cloak, 
and promise some satisfaction in your prologue, or, I'll be sworn 
we have marr'd all.  

2 CHILD.  Tut, fear not, child, this will never distaste a true 
sense: be not out, and good enough.  I would thou hadst some sugar 
candied to sweeten thy mouth.  



THE THIRD SOUNDING.

PROLOGUE.

If gracious silence, sweet attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
The lights of judgment's throne, shine any where,
Our doubtful author hopes this is their sphere;
And therefore opens he himself to those,
To other weaker beams his labours close,
As loth to prostitute their virgin-strain,
To every vulgar and adulterate brain.
In this alone, his Muse her sweetness hath,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves, nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or foamy praise, that drops from common jaws
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What merit is: then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, instead of honour'd bays,
About his poesy; which, he knows, affords
Words, above action; matter, above words.


ACT I

SCENE I. -- A GROVE AND FOUNTAIN.

ENTER CUPID, AND MERCURY WITH HIS CADUCEUS, ON DIFFERENT SIDES.

CUP.  Who goes there? 

MER.  'Tis I, blind archer.  

CUP.  Who, Mercury? 

MER.  Ay.  

CUP.  Farewell.  

MER.  Stay Cupid.  

CUP.  Not in your company, Hermes, except your hands were riveted at 
your back.  

MER.  Why so, my little rover? 

CUP.  Because I know you have not a finger, but is as long as my 
quiver, cousin Mercury, when you please to extend it.  

MER.  Whence derive you this speech, boy? 

CUP.  O! 'tis your best polity to be ignorant.  You did never steal 
Mars his sword out of the sheath, you! nor Neptune's trident! nor 
Apollo's bow! no, not you!  Alas, your palms, Jupiter knows, they 
are as tender as the foot of a foundered nag, or a lady's face new 
mercuried, they'll touch nothing.  

MER.  Go to, infant, you'll be daring still.  

CUP.  Daring! O Janus! what a word is there? why, my light 
feather-heel'd coz, what are you any more than my uncle Jove's 
pander? a lacquey that runs on errands for him, and can whisper a 
light message to a loose wench with some round volubility? wait 
mannerly at a table with a trencher, warble upon a crowd a little, 
and fill out nectar when Ganymede's away? one that sweeps the god's 
drinking-room every morning, and sets the cushions in order again, 
which they threw one at another's head over night; can brush the 
carpets, call the stools again to their places, play the crier of 
the court with an audible voice, and take state of a president upon 
you at wrestlings, pleadings, negociations, etc.  Here's the 
catalogue of your employments, now!  O, no, I err; you have the 
marshalling of all the ghosts too that pass the Stygian ferry, and 
I suspect you for a share with the old sculler there, if the truth 
were known; but let that scape.  One other peculiar virtue you 
possess, in lifting, or leiger-du-main, which few of the house of 
heaven have else besides, I must confess.  But, methinks, that 
should not make you put that extreme distance 'twixt yourself and 
others, that we should be said to "over-dare" in speaking to your 
nimble deity.  So Hercules might challenge priority of us both, 
because he can throw the bar farther, or lift more join'd stools at 
the arm's end, than we.  If this might carry it, then we, who have 
made the whole body of divinity tremble at the twang of our bow, 
and enforc'd Saturnius himself to lay by his curled front, thunder, 
and three-fork'd fires, and put on a masking suit, too light for a 
reveller of eighteen to be seen in --

MER.  How now! my dancing braggart in decimo sexto! charm your 
skipping tongue, or I'll --

CUP.  What! use the virtue of your snaky tip staff there upon us? 

MER.  No, boy, but the smart vigour of my palm about your ears. 
You have forgot since I took your heels up into air, on the very 
hour I was born, in sight of all the bench of deities, when the 
silver roof of the Olympian palace rung again with applause of 
the fact.  

CUP.  O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; 
for my mother Venus, at the same time, but stoop'd to embrace you, 
and, to speak by metaphor, you borrow'd a girdle of her's, as you 
did Jove's sceptre while he was laughing; and would have done his 
thunder too, but that 'twas too hot for your itching fingers.  

MER.  'Tis well, sir.  

CUP.  I heard, you but look'd in at Vulcan's forge the other day, 
and entreated a pair of his new tongs along with you for company: 
'tis joy on you, i' faith, that you will keep your hook'd talons in 
practice with any thing.  'Slight, now you are on earth, we shall 
have you filch spoons and candlesticks rather than fail: pray Jove 
the perfum'd courtiers keep their casting-bottles, pick-tooths, and 
shittle-cocks from you, or our more ordinary gallants their 
tobacco-boxes; for I am strangely jealous of your nails.  

MER.  Never trust me, Cupid, but you are turn'd a most acute 
gallant of late! the edge of my wit is clean taken off with the 
fine and subtile stroke of your thin-ground tongue; you fight with 
too poignant a phrase, for me to deal with.  

CUP.  O Hermes, your craft cannot make me confident.  I know my own 
steel to be almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you, 
in time: you are too cunning for me to encounter at length, and I 
think it my safest ward to close.  

MER.  Well, for once, I'll suffer you to win upon me, wag; but use 
not these strains too often, they'll stretch my patience.  Whither 
might you march, now? 

CUP.  Faith, to recover thy good thoughts, I'll discover my whole 
project.  The huntress and queen of these groves, Diana, in regard 
of some black and envious slanders hourly breathed against her, for 
her divine justice on Acteon, as she pretends, hath here in the 
vale of Gargaphie, proclaim'd a solemn revels, which (her godhead 
put off) she will descend to grace, with the full and royal expense 
of one of her clearest moons: in which time it shall be lawful for 
all sorts of ingenious persons to visit her palace, to court her 
nymphs, to exercise all variety of generous and noble pastimes; as 
well to intimate how far she treads such malicious imputations 
beneath her, as also to shew how clear her beauties are from the 
least wrinkle of austerity they may be charged with.  

MER.  But, what is all this to Cupid? 

CUP.  Here do I mean to put off the title of a god, and take the 
habit of a page, in which disguise, during the interim of these 
revels, I will get to follow some one of Diana's maids, where, if 
my bow hold, and my shafts fly but with half the willingness and 
aim they are directed, I doubt not but I shall really redeem the 
minutes I have lost, by their so long and over nice proscription of 
my deity from their court.  

MER.  Pursue it, divine Cupid, it will be rare.  

CUP.  But will Hermes second me? 

MER.  I am now to put in act an especial designment from my father 
Jove; but, that perform'd, I am for any fresh action that offers 
itself.  

CUP.  Well, then we part. [EXIT.]

MER.  Farewell good wag.
Now to my charge.--Echo, fair Echo speak,
'Tis Mercury that calls thee; sorrowful nymph,
Salute me with thy repercussive voice,
That I may know what cavern of the earth,
Contains thy airy spirit, how, or where
I may direct my speech, that thou may'st hear.

ECHO.  [BELOW]  Here.  

MER.  So nigh!  

ECHO.  Ay.  

MER.  Know, gentle soul, then, I am sent from Jove,
Who, pitying the sad burthen of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words
To vent thy passion for Narcissus' death,
Commands, that now, after three thousand years,
Which have been exercised in Juno's spite,
Thou take a corporal figure and ascend,
Enrich'd with vocal and articulate power.
Make haste, sad nymph, thrice shall my winged rod
Strike the obsequious earth, to give thee way.
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, Echo, rise,
Here, by this fountain, where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Shrined in this yellow flower, that bears his name.

ECHO.  [ASCENDS.]  His name revives, and lifts me up from earth,
O, which way shall I first convert myself,
Or in what mood shall I essay to speak,
That, in a moment, I may be deliver'd
Of the prodigious grief I go withal?
See, see, the mourning fount, whose springs weep yet
Th' untimely fate of that too beauteous boy,
That trophy of self-love, and spoil of nature,
Who, now transform'd into this drooping flower,
Hangs the repentant head, back from the stream,
As if it wish'd, "Would I had never look'd
In such a flattering mirror!"  O Narcissus,
Thou that wast once, and yet art, my Narcissus,
Had Echo but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropt away herself in tears,
Till she had all turn'd water; that in her,
As in a truer glass, thou might'st have gazed
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection,
But self-love never yet could look on truth
But with blear'd beams; slick flattery and she
Are twin-born sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you sever one, the other dies.
Why did the gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthly thoughts to make thee proud of it?
Why do I ask?  'Tis now the known disease
That beauty hath, to bear too deep a sense
Of her own self-conceived excellence.
O, hadst thou known the worth of heaven's rich gift,
Thou wouldst have turn'd it to a truer use,
And not with starv'd and covetous ignorance,
Pined in continual eyeing that bright gem,
The glance whereof to others had been more,
Than to thy famish'd mind the wide world's store:
So wretched is it to be merely rich!
Witness thy youth's dear sweets here spent untasted,
Like a fair taper, with his own flame wasted.

MER.  Echo be brief, Saturnia is abroad,
And if she hear, she'll storm at Jove's high will.

CUP.  I will, kind Mercury, be brief as time.
Vouchsafe me, I may do him these last rites,
But kiss his flower, and sing some mourning strain
Over his wat'ry hearse.

MER.  Thou dost obtain;
I were no son to Jove, should I deny thee,
Begin, and more to grace thy cunning voice,
The humorous air shall mix her solemn tunes
With thy sad words: strike, music from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.

ECHO. [ACCOMPANIED]

Slow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears:
Yet, slower, yet; O faintly, gentle springs:
List to the heavy part the music bears,
Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.
Droop herbs and flowers,
Fall grief and showers;
Our beauties are not ours;
O, I could still,
Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,
Drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since nature's pride is now a wither'd daffodil. --

MER.  Now have you done?

ECHO.  Done presently, good Hermes: bide a little;
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze awhile,
But e'en to taste the place, and I am vanish'd.

MER.  Forego thy use and liberty of tongue,
And thou mayst dwell on earth, and sport thee there;

ECHO.  Here young Acteon fell, pursued, and torn
By Cynthia's wrath, more eager than his hounds;
And here -- ah me, the place is fatal! -- see
The weeping Niobe, translated hither
From Phrygian mountains; and by Phoebe rear'd,
As the proud trophy of her sharp revenge.

MER.  Nay but hear --

ECHO.  But here, O here, the fountain of self-love,
In which Latona, and her careless nymphs,
Regardless of my sorrows, bathe themselves
In hourly pleasures.

MER.  Stint thy babbling tongue!
Fond Echo, thou profan'st the grace is done thee.
So idle worldlings merely made of voice,
Censure the powers above them.  Come away,
Jove calls thee hence; and his will brooks no stay.

ECHO.  O, stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe
In airy garments, and then, faith, I go.
Henceforth, thou treacherous and murdering spring,
Be ever call'd the FOUNTAIN OF SELF-LOVE:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
As an inseparate plague, that who but taste
A drop thereof, may, with the instant touch,
Grow dotingly enamour'd on themselves.
Now, Hermes, I have finish'd.

MER.  Then thy speech
Must here forsake thee, Echo, and thy voice,
As it was wont, rebound but the last words.
Farewell.

ECHO.  [RETIRING.]  Well.

MER.  Now, Cupid, I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.

ENTER AMORPHUS, HASTILY.

AMO.  Dear spark of beauty, make not so fast away: 

ECHO.  Away.  

MER.  Stay, let me observe this portent yet.  

AMO.  I am neither your Minotaur, nor your Centaur, nor your satyr, 
nor your hyaena, nor your babion, but your mere traveller, believe 
me.  

ECHO.  Leave me.  

MER.  I guess'd it should be some travelling motion pursued Echo 
so.  

AMO.  Know you from whom you fly? or whence? 

ECHO.  Hence.  [EXIT.]

AMO.  This is somewhat above strange: A nymph of her feature and 
lineament, to be so preposterously rude! well, I will but cool 
myself at yon spring, and follow her.  

MER.  Nay, then, I am familiar with the issue: I will leave you 
too.  [EXIT.] 

AMOR.  I am a rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her 
symmetry would have dared so improportionable and abrupt a 
digression. -- Liberal and divine fount, suffer my profane hand to 
take of thy bounties.  [TAKES UP SOME OF THE WATER.]  By the purity 
of my taste, here is most ambrosiac water; I will sup of it again. 
By thy favour, sweet fount.  See, the water, a more running, 
subtile, and humorous nymph than she permits me to touch, and 
handle her.  What should I infer? if my behaviours had been of a 
cheap or customary garb; my accent or phrase vulgar; my garments 
trite; my countenance illiterate, or unpractised in the encounter 
of a beautiful and brave attired piece; then I might, with some 
change of colour, have suspected my faculties: But, knowing myself 
an essence so sublimated and refined by travel; of so studied and 
well exercised a gesture; so alone in fashion, able to render the 
face of any statesman living; and to speak the mere extraction of 
language, one that hath now made the sixth return upon venture; and 
was your first that ever enrich'd his country with the true laws of 
the duello; whose optics have drunk the spirit of beauty in some 
eight score and eighteen prince's courts, where I have resided, and 
been there fortunate in the amours of three hundred and forty and five 
ladies, all nobly, if not princely descended; whose names I have in 
catalogue: To conclude, in all so happy, as even admiration 
herself doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me: -- certes, I do 
neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor savour the least steam or 
fume of a reason, that should invite this foolish, fastidious 
nymph, so peevishly to abandon me.  Well, let the memory of her 
fleet into air; my thoughts and I am for this other element, water.  

ENTER CRITES AND ASOTUS.  

CRI.  What, the well dieted Amorphus become a water-drinker!  I see 
he means not to write verses then.  

ASO.  No, Crites! why? 

CRI.  Because --
Nulla placere diu, nec vivere carmina possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.

AMO.  What say you to your Helicon? 

CRI.  O, the Muses' well! that's ever excepted.  

AMO.  Sir, your Muses have no such water, I assure you; your 
nectar, or the juice of your nepenthe, is nothing to it; 'tis above 
your metheglin, believe it.  

ASO.  Metheglin; what's that, sir? may I be so audacious to 
demand? 

AMO.  A kind of Greek wine I have met with, sir, in my travels; it 
is the same that Demosthenes usually drunk, in the composure of all 
his exquisite and mellifluous orations.  

CRI.  That's to be argued, Amorphus, if we may credit Lucian, who, 
in his "Encomio Demosthenis," affirms, he never drunk but water in 
any of his compositions.  

AMO.  Lucian is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe mine own 
travels before all the Lucians of Europe.  He doth feed you with 
fittons, figments, and leasings.  

CRI.  Indeed, I think, next a traveller, he does prettily well.  

AMO.  I assure you it was wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand 
of an Italian antiquary, who derives it authentically from the duke 
of Ferrara's bottles.  How name you the gentleman you are in rank 
there with, sir? 

CRI.  'Tis Asotus, son to the late deceased Philargyrus, the 
citizen.  

AMO.  Was his father of any eminent place or means? 

CRI.  He was to have been praetor next year.  

AMO.  Ha! a pretty formal young gallant, in good sooth; pity he is 
not more genteelly propagated.  Hark you, Crites, you may say to 
him what I am, if you please; though I affect not popularity, yet I 
would loth to stand out to any, whom you shall vouchsafe to call 
friend.  

CRI.  Sir, I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the 
reporting them, by forgetting or misplacing some one: yourself can 
best inform him of yourself sir; except you had some catalogue or 
list of your faculties ready drawn, which you would request me to 
show him for you, and him to take notice of.  

AMO.  This Crites is sour: [ASIDE.] -- I will think, sir.  

CRI.  Do so, sir. -- O heaven! that anything in the likeness of man 
should suffer these rack'd extremities, for the uttering of his 
sophisticate good parts. [ASIDE.] 

ASO.  Crites, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me; pray 
you make this gentleman and I friends.  

CRI.  Friends! why, is there any difference between you? 

ASO.  No; I mean acquaintance, to know one another.  

CRI.  O, now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me before.  

ASO.  In good faith, he's a most excellent rare man, I warrant 
him.  

CRI.  'Slight, they are mutually enamour'd by this time.  [ASIDE.]  

ASO.  Will you, sweet Crites? 

CRI.  Yes, yes.  

ASO.  Nay, but when? you'll defer it now, and forget it.  

CRI.  Why, is it a thing of such present necessity, that it 
requires so violent a dispatch! 

ASO.  No, but would I might never stir, he's a most ravishing man!  
Good Crites, you shall endear me to you, in good faith; la! 

CRI.  Well, your longing shall be satisfied, sir.  

ASO.  And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well 
he left me, and that I am his heir.  

CRI.  Leave it to me, I'll forget none of your dear graces, I 
warrant you.  

ASO.  Nay, I know you can better marshal these affairs than I can 
-- O gods! I'd give all the world, if I had it, for abundance of 
such acquaintance.  

CRI.  What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow 
this reciprocal brace of butterflies one upon another?  [ASIDE.]  

AMO.  Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my 
invention.  Let me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of 
Spanish, or Italian! that would indifferently express my languages 
now: marry, then, if he shall fall out to be ignorant, it were both 
hard, and harsh.  How else? step into some ragioni del stato, and 
so make my induction! that were above him too; and out of his 
element I fear.  Feign to have seen him in Venice or Padua! or some 
face near his in similitude! 'tis too pointed and open.  No, it must 
be a more quaint and collateral device, as -- stay: to frame some 
encomiastic speech upon this our metropolis, or the wise 
magistrates thereof, in which politic number, 'tis odds but his 
father fill'd up a room? descend into a particular admiration of 
their justice, for the due measuring of coals, burning of cans, and 
such like? as also their religion, in pulling down a superstitious 
cross, and advancing a Venus; or Priapus, in place of it? ha! 
'twill do well.  Or to talk of some hospital, whose walls record 
his father a benefactor? or of so many buckets bestow'd on his 
parish church in his lifetime, with his name at length, for want of 
arms, trickt upon them? any of these.  Or to praise the cleanness 
of the street wherein he dwelt? or the provident painting of his 
posts, against he should have been praetor? or, leaving his parent, 
come to some special ornament about himself, as his rapier, or some 
other of his accountrements?  I have it: thanks, gracious Minerva! 

ASO.  Would I had but once spoke to him, and then -- He comes to 
me! 

AMO.  'Tis a most curious and neatly wrought band this same, as I 
have seen, sir.  

ASO.  O lord, sir.  

AMO.  You forgive the humour of mine eye, in observing it.  

CRI.  His eye waters after it, it seems.  [ASIDE.]  

ASO.  O lord, sir! there needs no such apology I assure you.  

CRI.  I am anticipated; they'll make a solemn deed of gift of 
themselves, you shall see.  [ASIDE.] 

AMO.  Your riband too does most gracefully in troth.  

ASO.  'Tis the most genteel and received wear now, sir.  

AMO.  Believe me, sir, I speak it not to humour you -- I have not 
seen a young gentleman, generally, put on his clothes with more 
judgment.  

ASO.  O, 'tis your pleasure to say so, sir.  

AMO.  No, as I am virtuous, being altogether untravell'd, it 
strikes me into wonder.  

ASO.  I do purpose to travel, sir, at spring.  

AMO.  I think I shall affect you, sir.  This last speech of yours 
hath begun to make you dear to me.  

ASO.  O lord, sir! I would there were any thing in me, sir, that 
might appear worthy the least worthiness of your worth, sir.  I 
protest, sir, I should endeavour to shew it, sir, with more than 
common regard sir.  

CRI.  O, here's rare motley, sir. [ASIDE.]

AMO.  Both your desert, and your endeavours are plentiful, suspect 
them not: but your sweet disposition to travel, I assure you, hath 
made you another myself in mine eye, and struck me enamour'd on 
your beauties.  

ASO.  I would I were the fairest lady of France for your sake, sir! 
and yet I would travel too.  

AMO.  O, you should digress from yourself else: for, believe it, 
your travel is your only thing that rectifies, or, as the Italian 
says, "vi rendi pronto all' attioni," makes you fit for action.  

ASO.  I think it be great charge though, sir.  

AMO.  Charge! why 'tis nothing for a gentleman that goes private, 
as yourself, or so; my intelligence shall quit my charge at all 
time.  Good faith, this hat hath possest mine eye exceedingly; 'tis 
so pretty and fantastic: what! is it a beaver? 

ASO.  Ay, sir, I'll assure you 'tis a beaver, it cost me eight 
crowns but this morning.  

AMO.  After your French account? 

ASO.  Yes, sir.  

CRI.  And so near his head! beshrew me, dangerous. [ASIDE.]

AMO.  A very pretty fashion, believe me, and a most novel kind of 
trim: your band is conceited too! 

ASO.  Sir, it is all at your service.  

AMO.  O, pardon me.  

ASO.  I beseech you, sir, if you please to wear it, you shall do me 
a most infinite grace.  

CRI.  'Slight, will he be prais'd out of his clothes? 

ASO.  By heaven, sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian 
manner; I would you should conceive so of me.  

AMO.  Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your courtesies, 
especially being invited by so proper a distinction: May I pray 
your name, sir? 

ASO.  My name is Asotus, sir.  

AMO.  I take your love, gentle Asotus, but let me win you to 
receive this, in exchange. -- [THEY EXCHANGE BEAVERS.] 

CRI.  Heart! they'll change doublets anon.  [ASIDE.]

AMO.  And, from this time esteem yourself in the first rank of 
those few whom I profess to love.  What make you in company of this 
scholar here?  I will bring you known to gallants, as Anaides of 
the ordinary, Hedon the courtier, and others, whose society shall 
render you graced and respected: this is a trivial fellow, too 
mean, too cheap, too coarse for you to converse with.  

ASO.  'Slid, this is not worth a crown, and mine cost me eight but 
this morning.  

CRI.  I looked when he would repent him, he has begun to be sad a 
good while.  

AMO.  Sir, shall I say to you for that hat?  Be not so sad, be not 
so sad: It is a relic I could not so easily have departed with, but 
as the hieroglyphic of my affection; you shall alter it to what 
form you please, it will take any block; I have received it varied 
on record to the three thousandth time, and not so few: It hath 
these virtues beside: your head shall not ache under it, nor your 
brain leave you, without license; It will preserve your complexion 
to eternity; for no beam of the sun, should you wear it under zona 
torrida, hath power to approach it by two ells.  It is proof 
against thunder, and enchantment; and was given me by a great man 
in Russia, as an especial prized present; and constantly affirm'd 
to be the hat that accompanied the politic Ulysses in his tedious 
and ten years' travels.  

ASO.  By Jove, I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a 
million.  

ENTER COS AND PROSAITES.  

COS.  Save you sweet bloods! does any of you want a creature, or a 
dependent? 

CRI.  Beshrew me, a fine blunt slave! 

AMO.  A page of good timber! it will now be my grace to entertain 
him first, though I cashier him again in private. -- How art thou 
call'd? 

COS.  Cos, sir, Cos.  

CRI.  Cos! how happily hath fortune furnish'd him with a whetstone? 

AMO.  I do entertain you, Cos; conceal your quality till we be 
private; if your parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if 
not, catechise you. -- Gentles, shall we go? 

ASO.  Stay, sir: I'll but entertain this other fellow, and then -- 
I have a great humour to taste of this water too, but I'll come 
again alone for that -- mark the place. -- What's your name, youth? 

PROS.  Prosaites, sir.  

ASO.  Prosaites! a very fine name; Crites, is it not? 

CRI.  Yes, and a very ancient one, sir, the Beggar.  

ASO.  Follow me, good Prosaites; let's talk.  

[EXEUNT ALL BUT CRITES.]

CRI.  He will rank even with you, ere't be long.
If you hold on your course.  O, vanity
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light and empty idiots! how pursued
With open, and extended appetite!
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy airy forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reel like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour
With the long irksomeness of following time!
O, how despised and base a thing is man,
If he not strive to erect his grovelling thoughts
Above the strain of flesh? but how more cheap,
When, ev'n his best and understanding part,
The crown and strength of all his faculties,
Floats, like a dead drown'd body, on the stream
Of vulgar humour, mixt with common'st dregs!
I suffer for their guilt now, and my soul,
Like one that looks on ill-affected eyes,
Is hurt with mere intention on their follies.
Why will I view them then, my sense might ask me?
Or is't a rarity, or some new object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O, would it were! therein I could afford
My spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties; so vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul; and were it not
That those that woo her greet her with lock'd eyes,
In spight of all th' impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd, Custom, dawbs her cheeks withal,
She would betray her loath'd and leprous face,
And fright the enamour'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy levity,
How antic and ridiculous soe'er
It suit with us, yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, than avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We act our mimic tricks with that free license,
That lust, that pleasure, that security;
As if we practised in a paste-board case,
And no one saw the motion, but the motion.
Well, check thy passion, lest it grow too loud:
While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.


ACT II

SCENE I. -- THE COURT.

ENTER CUPID AND MERCURY, DISGUISED AS PAGES.

CUP.  Why, this was most unexpectedly followed, my divine delicate 
Mercury, by the beard of Jove, thou art a precious deity.  

MER.  Nay, Cupid, leave to speak improperly; since we are turn'd 
cracks, let's study to be like cracks; practise their language, and 
behaviours, and not with a dead imitation: Act freely, carelessly, 
and capriciously, as if our veins ran with quicksilver, and not 
utter a phrase, but what shall come forth steep'd in the very brine 
of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.  

CUP.  That's not every one's happiness, Hermes: Though you can 
presume upon the easiness and dexterity of your wit, you shall give 
me leave to be a little jealous of mine; and not desperately to 
hazard it after your capering humour.  

MER.  Nay, then, Cupid, I think we must have you hood-wink'd again; 
for you are grown too provident since your eyes were at liberty.  

CUP.  Not so, Mercury, I am still blind Cupid to thee.  

MER.  And what to the lady nymph you serve? 

CUP.  Troth, page, boy, and sirrah: these are all my titles.  

MER.  Then thou hast not altered thy name with thy disguise? 

CUP.  O, no, that had been supererogation; you shall never hear 
your courtier call but by one of these three.  

MER.  Faith, then both our fortunes are the same.  

CUP.  Why, what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for a master? 

MER.  Such a one as, before I begin to decipher him, I dare not 
affirm to be any thing less than a courtier.  So much he is during 
this open time of revels, and would be longer, but that his means 
are to leave him shortly after.  His name is Hedon, a gallant 
wholly consecrated to his pleasures.  

CUP.  Hedon! he uses much to my lady's chamber, I think.  

MER.  How is she call'd, and then I can shew thee? 

CUP.  Madame Philautia.  

MER.  O ay, he affects her very particularly indeed.  These are his 
graces. He doth (besides me) keep a barber and a monkey; he has a 
rich wrought waistcoat to entertain his visitants in, with a cap 
almost suitable.  His curtains and bedding are thought to be his 
own; his bathing-tub is not suspected.  He loves to have a fencer, 
a pedant, and a musician seen in his lodging a-mornings.  

CUP.  And not a poet? 

MER.  Fie no: himself is a rhymer, and that's thought better than 
a poet.  He is not lightly within to his mercer, no, though he come 
when he takes physic, which is commonly after his play.  He beats a 
tailor very well, but a stocking-seller admirably: and so 
consequently any one he owes money to, that dares not resist him. 
He never makes general invitement, but against the publishing of a 
new suit; marry, then you shall have more drawn to his lodging, 
than come to the launching of some three ships; especially if he be 
furnish'd with supplies for the retiring of his old wardrobe from 
pawn: if not, he does hire a stock of apparel, and some forty or 
fifty pound in gold, for that forenoon to shew.  He is thought a 
very necessary perfume for the presence, and for that only cause 
welcome thither: six milliners' shops afford you not the like 
scent.  He courts ladies with how many great horse he hath rid that 
morning, or how oft he hath done the whole, or half the pommado in a 
seven-night before: and sometime ventures so far upon the virtue of 
his pomander, that he dares tell 'em, how many shirts he has sweat 
at tennis that week; but wisely conceals so many dozen of balls he 
is on the score.  Here he comes, that is all this.  

ENTER HEDON, ANAIDES, AND GELAIA.  

HED.  Boy! 

MER.  Sir.  

HED.  Are any of the ladies in the presence? 

MER.  None yet, sir.  

HED.  Give me some gold, -- more.  

ANA.  Is that thy boy, Hedon? 

HED.  Ay, what think'st thou of him? 

ANA.  I'd geld him; I warrant he has the philosopher's stone.  

HED.  Well said, my good melancholy devil: sirrah, I have devised 
one or two of the prettiest oaths, this morning in my bed, as ever 
thou heard'st, to protest withal in the presence.  

ANA.  Prithee, let's hear them.  

HED.  Soft, thou'lt use them afore me.  

ANA.  No, d--mn me then -- I have more oaths than I know how to 
utter, by this air.  

HED.  Faith, one is, "By the tip of your ear, sweet lady."  Is it 
not pretty, and genteel? 

ANA.  Yes, for the person 'tis applied to, a lady.  It should be 
light, and --

HED.  Nay, the other is better, exceeds it much: the invention is 
farther fet too.  "By the white valley that lies between the alpine 
hills of your bosom, I protest. -- "

ANA.  Well, you travell'd for that, Hedon.  

MER.  Ay, in a map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his 
understanding, it seems.  

HED.  And then I have a salutation will nick all, by this caper:  
hay! 

ANA.  How is that? 

HED.  You know I call madam Philautia, my Honour; and she calls me 
her Ambition.  Now, when I meet her in the presence anon, I will 
come to her, and say, "Sweet Honour, I have hitherto contented my 
sense with the lilies of your hand; but now I will taste the roses 
of your lip"; and, withal, kiss her: to which she cannot but 
blushing answer, "Nay now you are too ambitious."  And then do I 
reply: "I cannot be too Ambitious of Honour, sweet lady."  Will't 
not be good? ha? ha? 

ANA.  O, assure your soul.  

HED.  By heaven, I think 'twill be excellent: and a very politic 
achievement of a kiss.  

ANA.  I have thought upon one for Moria of a sudden too, if it take.  

HED.  What is't, my dear Invention? 

ANA.  Marry, I will come to her, (and she always wears a muff, if 
you be remembered,) and I will tell her, "Madam your whole self 
cannot but be perfectly wise; for your hands have wit enough to 
keep themselves warm." 

HED.  Now, before Jove, admirable!  [GELAIA LAUGHS.]  Look, thy page 
takes it too.  By Phoebus, my sweet facetious rascal, I could eat 
water-gruel with thee a month for this jest, my dear rogue.  

ANA.  O, Hercules 'tis your only dish; above all your potatoes or 
oyster-pies in the world.  

HED.  I have ruminated upon a most rare wish too, and the prophecy 
to it; but I'll have some friend to be the prophet; as thus: I do 
wish myself one of my mistress's cioppini.  Another demands, Why 
would he be one of his mistress's cioppini? a third answers, 
Because he would make her higher: a fourth shall say, That will 
make her proud: and a fifth shall conclude, Then do I prophesy 
pride will have a fall; -- and he shall give it her.  

ANA.  I will be your prophet.  Gods so, it will be most exquisite; 
thou art a fine inventious rogue, sirrah.  

HED.  Nay, and I have posies for rings, too, and riddles, that they 
dream not of.  

ANA.  Tut, they'll do that, when they come to sleep on them, time 
enough: But were thy devices never in the presence yet, Hedon? 

HED.  O, no, I disdain that.  

ANA.  'Twere good we went afore then, and brought them acquainted 
with the room where they shall act, lest the strangeness of it put 
them out of countenance, when they should come forth.  

[EXEUNT HEDON AND ANAIDES.]

CUP.  Is that a courtier, too.  

MER.  Troth, no; he has two essential parts of the courtier, pride 
and ignorance; marry, the rest come somewhat after the ordinary 
gallant.  'Tis Impudence itself, Anaides; one that speaks all that 
comes in his cheeks, and will blush no more than a sackbut.  He 
lightly occupies the jester's room at the table, and keeps 
laughter, Gelaia, a wench in page's attire, following him in place 
of a squire, whom he now and then tickles with some strange 
ridiculous stuff, utter'd as his land came to him, by chance.  He 
will censure or discourse of any thing, but as absurdly as you 
would wish.  His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that is 
beneath him in clothes.  He never drinks below the salt.  He does 
naturally admire his wit that wears gold lace, or tissue: stabs 
any man that speaks more contemptibly of the scholar than he.  He 
is a great proficient in all the illiberal sciences, as cheating, 
drinking, swaggering, whoring, and such like: never kneels but to 
pledge healths, nor prays but for a pipe of pudding-tobacco.  He 
will blaspheme in his shirt.  The oaths which he vomits at one 
supper would maintain a town of garrison in good swearing a 
twelvemonth.  One other genuine quality he has which crowns all 
these, and that is this: to a friend in want, he will not depart 
with the weight of a soldered groat, lest the world might censure 
him prodigal, or report him a gull: marry, to his cockatrice or 
punquetto, half a dozen taffata gowns or satin kirtles in a pair or 
two of months, why, they are nothing.  

CUP.  I commend him, he is one of my clients.  

[THEY RETIRE TO THE BACK OF THE STAGE.]

ENTER AMORPHUS, ASOTUS, AND COS.  

AMO.  Come, sir.  You are now within regard of the presence, and 
see, the privacy of this room how sweetly it offers itself to our 
retired intendments. -- Page, cast a vigilant and enquiring eye 
about, that we be not rudely surprised by the approach of some 
ruder stranger.  

COS.  I warrant you, sir.  I'll tell you when the wolf enters, fear 
nothing.  

MER.  O what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the 
invisible spectators of this strange show now to be acted! 

AMO.  Plant yourself there, sir; and observe me.  You shall now, as 
well be the ocular, as the ear-witness, how clearly I can refel 
that paradox, or rather pseudodox, of those, which hold the face to
be the index of the mind, which, I assure you, is not so in any 
politic creature: for instance; I will now give you the particular 
and distinct face of every your most noted species of persons, as 
your merchant, your scholar, your soldier, your lawyer, courtier, 
etc., and each of these so truly, as you would swear, but that your 
eye shall see the variation of the lineament, it were my most 
proper and genuine aspect.  First, for your merchant, or city-face, 
'tis thus; a dull, plodding-face, still looking in a direct line, 
forward: there is no great matter in this face.  Then have you 
your student's, or academic face; which is here an honest, simple, 
and methodical face; but somewhat more spread then the former.  The 
third is your soldier's face, a menacing and astounding face, that 
looks broad and big: the grace of his face consisteth much in a 
beard.  The anti-face to this, is your lawyer's face, a contracted, 
subtile, and intricate face, full of quirks and turnings, a 
labyrinthean face, now angularly, now circularly, every way 
aspected.  Next is your statist's face, a serious, solemn, and 
supercilious face, full of formal and square gravity; the eye, for 
the most part, deeply and artificially shadow'd; there is great 
judgment required in the making of this face.  But now, to come to 
your face of faces, or courtier's face; 'tis of three sorts, 
according to our subdivision of a courtier, elementary, practic, 
and theoric.  Your courtier theoric, is he that hath arrived to his 
farthest, and doth now know the court rather by speculation than 
practice; and this is his face: a fastidious and oblique face; that 
looks as it went with a vice, and were screw'd thus.  Your courtier 
practic, is he that is yet in his path, his course, his way, and 
hath not touch'd the punctilio or point of his hopes; his face is 
here: a most promising, open, smooth, and overflowing face, that 
seems as it would run and pour itself into you: somewhat a 
northerly face.  Your courtier elementary, is one but newly 
enter'd, or as it were in the alphabet, or ut-re-mi-fa-sol-la of 
courtship.  Note well this face, for it is this you must practise.  

ASO.  I'll practise them all, if you please, sir.  

AMO.  Ay, hereafter you may: and it will not be altogether an 
ungrateful study.  For, let your soul be assured of this, in any 
rank or profession whatever, the more general or major part of 
opinion goes with the face and simply respects nothing else. 
Therefore, if that can be made exactly, curiously, exquisitely, 
thoroughly, it is enough: but for the present you shall only apply 
yourself to this face of the elementary courtier, a light, 
revelling, and protesting face, now blushing, now smiling, which 
you may help much with a wanton wagging of your head, thus, (a 
feather will teach you,) or with kissing your finger that hath the 
ruby, or playing with some string of your band, which is a most 
quaint kind of melancholy besides: or, if among ladies, laughing 
loud, and crying up your own wit, though perhaps borrow'd, it is 
not amiss.  Where is your page? call for your casting-bottle, and 
place your mirror in your hat, as I told you; so!  Come, look not 
pale, observe me, set your face, and enter.  

MER.  O, for some excellent painter, to have taken the copy of all 
these faces!  [ASIDE.]

ASO.  Prosaites! 

AMO.  Fie!  I premonish you of that: in the court, boy, lacquey, or 
sirrah.  

COS.  Master, lupus in -- O, 'tis Prosaites.  

ENTER PROSAITES.  

ASO.  Sirrah, prepare my casting-bottle; I think I must be 
enforced to purchase me another page; you see how at hand Cos waits 
here.  

[EXEUNT AMORPHUS, ASOTUS, COS, AND PROSAITES.]

MER.  So will he too in time.  

CUP.  What's he Mercury? 

MER.  A notable smelt.  One that hath newly entertain'd the beggar 
to follow him, but cannot get him to wait near enough.  'Tis 
Asotus, the heir of Philargyrus; but first I'll give ye the other's 
character, which may make his the clearer.  He that is with him is 
Amorphus, a traveller, one so made out of the mixture of shreds of 
forms, that himself is truly deform'd.  He walks most commonly with 
a clove or pick-tooth in his mouth, he is the very mint of 
compliment, all his behaviours are printed, his face is another 
volume of essays, and his beard is an Aristarchus.  He speaks all 
cream skimm'd, and more affected than a dozen waiting women.  He 
is his own promoter in every place.  The wife of the ordinary gives 
him his diet to maintain her table in discourse; which, indeed, is 
a mere tyranny over her other guests, for he will usurp all the 
talk: ten constables are not so tedious.  He is no great shifter; 
once a year his apparel is ready to revolt.  He doth use much to 
arbitrate quarrels, and fights himself, exceeding well, out at a 
window.  He will lie cheaper than any beggar, and louder than most 
clocks; for which he is right properly accommodated to the 
Whetstone, his page.  The other gallant is his zany, and doth most 
of these tricks after him; sweats to imitate him in every thing to 
a hair, except a beard, which is not yet extant.  He doth learn to 
make strange sauces, to eat anchovies, maccaroni, bovoli, fagioli, 
and caviare, because he loves them; speaks as he speaks, looks, 
walks, goes so in clothes and fashion: is in all as if he were 
moulded of him. Marry, before they met, he had other very pretty 
sufficiencies, which yet he retains some light impression of; as 
frequenting a dancing school, and grievously torturing strangers 
with inquisition after his grace in his galliard.  He buys a fresh 
acquaintance at any rate.  His eyes and his raiment confer much 
together as he goes in the street.  He treads nicely like the 
fellow that walks upon ropes, especially the first Sunday of his 
silk stockings; and when he is most neat and new, you shall strip 
him with commendations.  

CUP.  Here comes another.  [CRITES PASSES OVER THE STAGE.]

MER.  Ay, but one of another strain, Cupid; This fellow weighs 
somewhat.  

CUP.  His name, Hermes? 

MER.  Crites.  A creature of a most perfect and divine temper: one, 
in whom the humours and elements are peaceably met, without 
emulation of precedency; he is neither too fantastically 
melancholy, too slowly phlegmatic, too lightly sanguine, or too 
rashly choleric; but in all so composed and ordered; as it is clear 
Nature went about some full work, she did more than make a man when 
she made him.  His discourse is like his behaviour, uncommon, but 
not unpleasing; he is prodigal of neither.  He strives rather to be 
that which men call judicious, than to be thought so; and is so 
truly learned, that he affects not to shew it.  He will think and 
speak his thought both freely; but as distant from depraving
another man's merit, as proclaiming his own.  For his valour, 'tis 
such, that he dares as little to offer any injury, as receive one. 
In sum, he hath a most ingenuous and sweet spirit, a sharp and 
season'd wit, a straight judgment and a strong mind.  Fortune 
could never break him, nor make him less.  He counts it his 
pleasure to despise pleasures, and is more delighted with good 
deeds than goods.  It is a competency to him that he can be 
virtuous.  He doth neither covet nor fear; he hath too much reason 
to do either; and that commends all things to him.  

CUP.  Not better than Mercury commends him.  

MER.  O, Cupid, 'tis beyond my deity to give him his due praises: 
I could leave my place in heaven to live among mortals, so I were 
sure to be no other than he.  

CUP.  'Slight, I believe he is your minion, you seem to be so 
ravish'd with him.  

MER.  He's one I would not have a wry thought darted against, 
willingly.  

CUP.  No, but a straight shaft in his bosom I'll promise him, if I 
am Cytherea's son.  

MER.  Shall we go, Cupid? 

CUP.  Stay, and see the ladies now: they'll come presently.  I'll 
help to paint them.  

MER.  What lay colour upon colour! that affords but an ill blazon.  

CUP.  Here comes metal to help it, the lady Argurion.  

[ARGURION PASSES OVER THE STAGE.]

MER.  Money, money.  

CUP.  The same.  A nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition, 
humorous as the air, she'll run from gallant to gallant, as they 
sit at primero in the presence, most strangely, and seldom stays 
with any.  She spreads as she goes.  To-day you shall have her look 
as clear and fresh as the morning, and to-morrow as melancholic as 
midnight.  She takes special pleasure in a close obscure lodging, 
and for that cause visits the city so often, where she has many 
secret true concealing favourites.  When she comes abroad she's 
more loose and scattering than dust, and will fly from place to 
place, as she were wrapped with a whirlwind.  Your young student, 
for the most part, she affects not, only salutes him, and away: a 
poet, nor a philosopher, she is hardly brought to take any notice 
of; no, though he be some part of an alchemist.  She loves a player 
well, and a lawyer infinitely; but your fool above all.  She can do 
much in court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door 
but flies open to her, her presence is above a charm.  The worst in 
her is want of keeping state, and too much descending into inferior 
and base offices; she's for any coarse employment you will put upon 
her, as to be your procurer, or pander.  

MER.  Peace, Cupid, here comes more work for you, another character 
or two.  

ENTER PHANTASTE, MORIA, AND PHILAUTIA.  

PHA.  Stay sweet Philautia; I'll but change my fan, and go 
presently.  

MOR.  Now, in very good serious, ladies, I will have this order 
revers'd, the presence must be better maintain'd from you: a 
quarter past eleven, and ne'er a nymph in prospective!  Beshrew my 
hand, there must be a reform'd discipline.  Is that your new ruff, 
sweet lady-bird?  By my troth, 'tis most intricately rare.  

MER.  Good Jove, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be? 

CUP.  'Tis madam Moria, guardian of the nymphs; one that is not now 
to be persuaded of her wit; she will think herself wise against all 
the judgments that come.  A lady made all of voice and air, talks 
any thing of any thing. She is like one of your ignorant poetasters 
of the time, who, when they have got acquainted with a strange 
word, never rest till they have wrung it in, though it loosen the 
whole fabric of their sense.  

MER.  That was pretty and sharply noted, Cupid.  

CUP.  She will tell you, Philosophy was a fine reveller, when she 
was young, and a gallant, and that then, though she say it, she was 
thought to be the dame Dido and Helen of the court: as also, what 
a sweet dog she had this time four years, and how it was called 
Fortune; and that, if the Fates had not cut his thread, he had been 
a dog to have given entertainment to any gallant in this kingdom; 
and unless she had whelp'd it herself, she could not have loved a 
thing better in this world.  

MER.  O, I prithee no more; I am full of her.  

CUP.  Yes, I must needs tell you she composes a sack-posset well; 
and would court a young page sweetly, but that her breath is 
against it.  

MER.  Now, her breath or something more strong protect me from her! 
The other, the other, Cupid.  

CUP.  O, that's my lady and mistress, madam Philautia.  She admires 
not herself for any one particularity, but for all: she is fair, 
and she knows it; she has a pretty light wit too, and she knows it; 
she can dance, and she knows that too; play at shuttle-cock, and 
that too: no quality she has, but she shall take a very particular 
knowledge of, and most lady-like commend it to you.  You shall have 
her at any time read you the history of herself, and very subtilely 
run over another lady's sufficiencies to come to her own.  She has 
a good superficial judgment in painting; and would seem to have so 
in poetry.  A most complete lady in the opinion of some three 
beside herself.  

PHI.  Faith, how liked you my quip to Hedon, about the garter?  
Was't not witty? 

MOR.  Exceeding witty and integrate: you did so aggravate the jest 
withal.  

PHI.  And did I not dance movingly the last night? 

MOR.  Movingly! out of measure, in troth, sweet charge.  

MER.  A happy commendation, to dance out of measure!  

MOR.  Save only you wanted the swim in the turn: O! when I was at 
fourteen --

PHI.  Nay, that's mine own from any nymph in the court, I'm sure 
on't; therefore you mistake me in that, guardian: both the swim and 
the trip are properly mine; every body will affirm it that has any 
judgment in dancing, I assure you.  

PHA.  Come now, Philautia, I am for you; shall we go? 

PHI.  Ay, good Phantaste: What! have you changed your head-tire? 

PHA.  Yes, faith; the other was so near the common, it had no 
extraordinary grace; besides, I had worn it almost a day, in good 
troth.  

PHI.  I'll be sworn, this is most excellent for the device, and 
rare; 'tis after the Italian print we look'd on t'other night.  

PHA.  'Tis so: by this fan, I cannot abide any thing that savours 
the poor over-worn cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have 
variety, I: this mixing in fashion, I hate it worse than to burn 
juniper in my chamber, I protest.  

PHI.  And yet we cannot have a new peculiar court-tire, but these 
retainers will have it; these suburb Sunday-waiters; these 
courtiers for high days; I know not what I should call 'em -- 

PHA.  O, ay, they do most pitifully imitate; but I have a tire a 
coming, i'faith, shall --

MOR.  In good certain, madam, it makes you look most heavenly; but, 
lay your hand on your heart, you never skinn'd a new beauty more 
prosperously in your life, nor more metaphysically: look good lady, 
sweet lady, look.  

PHI.  'Tis very clear and well, believe me.  But if you had seen 
mine yesterday, when 'twas young, you would have -- Who's your 
doctor, Phantaste? 

PHA.  Nay, that's counsel, Philautia; you shall pardon me: yet I'll 
assure you he's the most dainty, sweet, absolute, rare man of the 
whole college.  O! his very looks, his discourse, his behaviour, all 
he does is physic, I protest.  

PHI.  For heaven's sake, his name, good dear Phantaste? 

PHA.  No, no, no, no, no, no, believe me, not for a million of 
heavens: I will not make him cheap. Fie --

[EXEUNT PHANTASTE, MORIA, AND PHILAUTIA.]

CUP.  There is a nymph too of a most curious and elaborate strain, 
light, all motion, an ubiquitary, she is every where, Phantaste --

MER.  Her very name speaks her, let her pass.  But are these, 
Cupid, the stars of Cynthia's court?  Do these nymphs attend upon 
Diana? 

CUP.  They are in her court, Mercury, but not as stars; these never 
come in the presence of Cynthia.  The nymphs that make her train 
are the divine Arete, Time, Phronesis, Thauma, and others of that 
high sort.  These are privately brought in by Moria in this 
licentious time, against her knowledge; and, like so many meteors, 
will vanish when she appears.  

ENTER PROSAITES SINGING, FOLLOWED BY GELAIA AND COS, WITH BOTTLES.  

Come follow me, my wags, and say, as I say,
There's no riches but in rags, hey day, hey day:
You that profess this art, come away, come away,
And help to bear a part.  Hey day, hey day, etc.

[MERCURY AND CUPID COME FORWARD.]

MER.  What, those that were our fellow pages but now, so soon 
preferr'd to be yeomen of the bottles!  The mystery, the mystery, 
good wags? 

CUP.  Some diet-drink they have the guard of.  

PRO.  No, sir, we are going in quest of a strange fountain, lately 
found out.  

CUP.  By whom? 

COS.  My master or the great discoverer, Amorphus.  

MER.  Thou hast well entitled him, Cos, for he will discover all he 
knows.  

GEL.  Ay, and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.  

PRO.  O, the good travelling gentleman yonder has caused such a 
drought in the presence, with reporting the wonders of this new 
water, that all the ladies and gallants lie languishing upon the 
rushes, like so many pounded cattle in the midst of harvest, 
sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them expected a 
cock from the fountain to be brought into his mouth; and without 
we return quickly, they are all, as a youth would say, no better 
then a few trouts cast ashore, or a dish of eels in a sand-bag.  

MER.  Well then, you were best dispatch, and have a care of them. 
Come, Cupid, thou and I'll go peruse this dry wonder.  [EXEUNT.]


ACT III

SCENE I. -- AN APARTMENT AT THE COURT.

ENTER AMORPHUS AND ASOTUS.

AMO.  Sir, let not this discountenance or disgallant you a whit; 
you must not sink under the first disaster.  It is with your young 
grammatical courtier, as with your neophyte player, a thing usual 
to be daunted at the first presence or interview: you saw, there 
was Hedon, and Anaides, far more practised gallants than yourself, 
who were both out, to comfort you.  It is no disgrace, no more than 
for your adventurous reveller to fall by some inauspicious chance 
in his galliard, or for some subtile politic to undertake the 
bastinado, that the state might think worthily of him, and respect 
him as a man well beaten to the world.  What? hath your tailor 
provided the property we spake of at your chamber, or no? 

ASO.  I think he has.  

AMO.  Nay, I entreat you, be not so flat and melancholic.  Erect 
your mind: you shall redeem this with the courtship I will teach 
you against the afternoon.  Where eat you to-day? 

ASO.  Where you please, sir; any where, I.  

AMO.  Come, let us go and taste some light dinner, a dish of sliced 
caviare, or so; and after, you shall practise an hour at your 
lodging some few forms that I have recall'd.  If you had but so far 
gathered your spirits to you, as to have taken up a rush when you 
were out, and wagg'd it thus, or cleansed your teeth with it; or 
but turn'd aside, and feign'd some business to whisper with your 
page, till you had recovered yourself, or but found some slight 
stain in your stocking, or any other pretty invention, so it had 
been sudden, you might have come off with a most clear and courtly 
grace.  

ASO.  A poison of all!  I think I was forespoke, I.  

AMO.  No, I must tell you, you are not audacious enough; you must 
frequent ordinaries a month more, to initiate yourself: in which 
time, it will not be amiss, if, in private, you keep good your 
acquaintance with Crites, or some other of his poor coat; visit his 
lodging secretly and often; become an earnest suitor to hear some 
of his labours.  

ASO.  O Jove! sir, I could never get him to read a line to me.  

AMO.  You must then wisely mix yourself in rank with such as you 
know can; and, as your ears do meet with a new phrase, or an acute 
jest, take it in: a quick nimble memory will lift it away, and, at 
your next public meal, it is your own.  

ASO.  But I shall never utter it perfectly, sir.  

AMO.  No matter, let it come lame.  In ordinary talk you shall play 
it away, as you do your light crowns at primero: it will pass.  

ASO.  I shall attempt, sir.  

AMO.  Do.  It is your shifting age for wit, and, I assure you, men 
must be prudent.  After this you may to court, and there fall in, 
first with the waiting-woman, then with the lady.  Put case they do 
retain you there, as a fit property, to hire coaches some pair of 
months, or so; or to read them asleep in afternoons upon some 
pretty pamphlet, to breathe you; why, it shall in time embolden you 
to some farther achievement: in the interim, you may fashion 
yourself to be careless and impudent.  

ASO.  How if they would have me to make verses?  I heard Hedon 
spoke to for some.  

AMO.  Why, you must prove the aptitude of your genius; if you find 
none, you must hearken out a vein, and buy; provided you pay for 
the silence as for the work, then you may securely call it your 
own.  

ASO.  Yes, and I'll give out my acquaintance with all the best 
writers, to countenance me the more.  

AMO.  Rather seem not to know them, it is your best.  Ay, be wise, 
that you never so much as mention the name of one, nor remember it 
mentioned; but if they be offer'd to you in discourse, shake your 
light head, make between a sad and a smiling face, pity some, rail 
at all, and commend yourself: 'tis your only safe and unsuspected 
course.  Come, you shall look back upon the court again to-day, and
be restored to your colours: I do now partly aim at the cause of
your repulse -- which was ominous indeed -- for as you enter at the
door, there is opposed to you the frame of a wolf in the hangings, 
which, surprising your eye suddenly, gave a false alarm to the 
heart; and that was it called your blood out of your face, and so 
routed the whole rank of your spirits: I beseech you labour to 
forget it.  And remember, as I inculcated to you before, for your 
comfort, Hedon and Anaides.  [EXEUNT.]


SCENE II. -- ANOTHER APARTMENT IN THE SAME.

ENTER HEDON AND ANAIDES.

HEDON.  Heart, was there ever so prosperous an invention thus 
unluckily perverted and spoiled, by a whoreson book-worm, a 
candle-waster? 

ANA.  Nay, be not impatient, Hedon.  

HED.  'Slight, I would fain know his name.  

ANA.  Hang him, poor grogan rascal! prithee think not of him: I'll 
send for him to my lodging, and have him blanketed when thou wilt, 
man.  

HED.  Ods so, I would thou couldst.  Look, here he comes.  

ENTER CRITES, AND WALKS IN A MUSING POSTURE AT THE BACK OF THE 
STAGE.  

Laugh at him, laugh at him; ha, ha, ha.  

ANA.  Fough! he smells all lamp-oil with studying by candle-light.  

HED.  How confidently he went by us, and carelessly!  Never moved, 
nor stirred at any thing!  Did you observe him? 

ANA.  Ay, a pox on him, let him go, dormouse: he is in a dream 
now.  He has no other time to sleep, but thus when he walks abroad 
to take the air.

HED.  'Sprecious, this afflicts me more than all the rest, that we 
should so particularly direct our hate and contempt against him, 
and he to carry it thus without wound or passion! 'tis 
insufferable.

ANA.  'Slid, my dear Envy, if thou but say'st the word now, I'll 
undo him eternally for thee.

HED.  How, sweet Anaides?

ANA.  Marry, half a score of us get him in, one night, and make him 
pawn his wit for a supper.  

HED.  Away, thou hast such unseasonable jests!  By this heaven, I 
wonder at nothing more than our gentlemen ushers, that will suffer 
a piece of serge or perpetuana to come into the presence: methinks 
they should, out of their experience, better distinguish the 
silken disposition of courtiers, than to let such terrible coarse 
rags mix with us, able to fret any smooth or gentle society to the 
threads with their rubbing devices.  

ANA.  Unless 'twere Lent, Ember-weeks, or fasting days, when the 
place is most penuriously empty of all other good outsides.  D--n 
me, if I should adventure on his company once more, without a suit 
of buff to defend my wit! he does nothing but stab, the slave!  
How mischievously he cross'd thy device of the prophecy, there?  
and Moria, she comes without her muff too, and there my invention 
was lost.  

HED.  Well, I am resolved what I'll do.  

ANA.  What, my good spiritous spark? 

HED.  Marry, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his 
reputation in every place where I come.  

ANA.  'Fore God, most courtly.  

HED.  And if I chance to be present where any question is made of 
his sufficiencies, or of any thing he hath done private or public, 
I'll censure it slightly, and ridiculously.

ANA.  At any hand beware of that; so thou may'st draw thine own 
judgment in suspect.  No, I'll instruct thee what thou shalt do, 
and by a safer means: approve any thing thou hearest of his, to the 
received opinion of it; but if it be extraordinary, give it from 
him to some other whom thou more particularly affect'st; that's the 
way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend himself. 
'Slud, I'll give out all he does is dictated from other men, and 
swear it too, if thou'lt have me, and that I know the time and 
place where he stole it, though my soul be guilty of no such thing; 
and that I think, out of my heart, he hates such barren shifts: yet 
to do thee a pleasure and him a disgrace, I'll damn myself, or do 
any thing.  

HED.  Gramercy, my dear devil; we'll put it seriously in practice, 
i'faith.  [EXEUNT HEDON AND ANAIDES.]

CRI.  [COMING FORWARD.]  
Do, good Detraction, do, and I the while
Shall shake thy spight off with a careless smile.
Poor piteous gallants! what lean idle slights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starv'd hopes!
As if I knew not how to entertain
These straw-devices; but, of force must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
What should I care what every dor doth buz
In credulous ears?  It is a crown to me
That the best judgments can report me wrong'd;
Them liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps, upon the rumour of their speeches,
Some grieved friend will whisper to me; Crites,
Men speak ill of thee.  So they be ill men,
If they spake worse, 'twere better: for of such
To be dispraised, is the most perfect praise.
What can his censure hurt me, whom the world
Hath censured vile before me!  If good Chrestus,
Euthus, or Phronimus, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me, and I should have call'd
My thoughts and actions to a strict account
Upon the hearing: but when I remember,
'Tis Hedon and Anaides, alas, then
I think but what they are, and am not stirr'd.
The one a light voluptuous reveller,
The other, a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk as they are wont, not as I merit;
Traduce by custom, as most dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgment, but disease,
Speak ill, because they never could speak well.
And who'd be angry with this race of creatures?
What wise physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantic man? the same affects
That he doth bear to his sick patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these;
And I do count it a most rare revenge,
That I can thus, with such a sweet neglect,
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their malice;
For that's the mark of all their enginous drifts,
To wound my patience, howso'er they seem
To aim at other objects; which if miss'd,
Their envy's like an arrow shot upright,
That, in the fall, endangers their own heads.

ENTER ARETE.

ARE.  What, Crites! where have you drawn forth the day,
You have not visited your jealous friends? 

CRI.  Where I have seen, most honour'd Arete,
The strangest pageant, fashion'd like a court,
(At least I dreamt I saw it) so diffused,
So painted, pied, and full of rainbow strains;
As never yet, either by time, or place,
Was made the food to my distasted sense;
Nor can my weak imperfect memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were convolved within this thrifty room.
Here stalks me by a proud and spangled sir,
That looks three handfuls higher then his foretop;
Savours himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself; one that will speak
More dark and doubtful than six oracles!
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch;
Is his own chronicle, and scarce can eat
For regist'ring himself; is waited on
By mimics, jesters, panders, parasites,
And other such like prodigies of men.
He past, appears some mincing marmoset
Made all of clothes and face; his limbs so set
As if they had some voluntary act
Without man's motion, and must move just so
In spight of their creation: one that weighs
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile
Beyond a point, for fear t'unstarch his look;
Hath travell'd to make legs, and seen the cringe
Of several courts, and courtiers; knows the time
Of giving titles, and of taking walls;
Hath read court common-places; made them his:
Studied the grammar of state, and all the rules
Each formal usher in that politic school
Can teach a man.  A third comes, giving nods
To his repenting creditors, protests
To weeping suitors, takes the coming gold
Of insolent and base ambition,
That hourly rubs his dry and itchy palms;
Which griped, like burning coals, he hurls away
Into the laps of bawds, and buffoons' mouths.
With him there meets some subtle Proteus, one
Can change, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Hovers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which, with cross face, he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: one that dares
Do deeds worthy the hurdle or the wheel,
To be thought somebody; and is in sooth
Such as the satirist points truly forth,
That only to his crimes owes all his worth.

ARE.  You tell us wonders, Crites.

CRI.  This is nothing.
There stands a neophite glazing of his face,
Pruning his clothes, perfuming of his hair,
Against his idol enters; and repeats,
Like an unperfect prologue, at third music,
His part of speeches, and confederate jests,
In passion to himself.  Another swears
His scene of courtship over; bids, believe him,
Twenty times ere they will; anon, doth seem
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
Then walks off melancholic, and stands wreath'd,
As he were pinn'd up to the arras, thus.
A third is most in action, swims, and frisks,
Plays with his mistress's paps, salutes her pumps;
Adores her hems, her skirts, her knots, her curls,
Will spend his patrimony for a garter,
Or the least feather in her bounteous fan.
A fourth, he only comes in for a mute;
Divides the act with a dumb show, and exit.
Then must the ladies laugh, straight comes their scene,
A sixth times worse confusion then the rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this man's eye,
Another of his lip, a third, his nose,
A fourth commend his leg, a fifth, his foot,
A sixth, his hand, and every one a limb;
That you would think the poor distorted gallant
Must there expire.  Then fall they in discourse
Of tires, and fashions, how they must take place,
Where they may kiss, and whom, when to sit down,
And with what grace to rise; if they salute,
What court'sy they must use; such cobweb stuff
As would enforce the common'st sense abhor
Th' Arachnean workers.

ARE.  Patience, gentle Crites.
This knot of spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of Cynthia's court,
When once her glorious deity appears,
And but presents itself in her full light:
'Till when, go in, and spend your hours with us,
Your honour'd friends.  Time and Phronesis,
In contemplation of our goddess' name.
Think on some sweet and choice invention now,
Worthy her serious and illustrious eyes,
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to Cynthia.
It is the pride of Arete to grace
Her studious lovers; and, in scorn of time,
Envy, and ignorance, to lift their state
Above a vulgar height.  True happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in their worth, and choice.  Nor would I have
Virtue a popular regard pursue:
Let them be good that love me, though but few.

CRI.  I kiss thy hands, divinest Arete,
And vow myself to thee, and Cynthia.  [EXEUNT.]


SCENE III. -- ANOTHER APARTMENT IN THE SAME.

ENTER AMORPHUS, FOLLOWED BY ASOTUS AND HIS TAILOR.

AMO.  A little more forward: so, sir.  Now go in, discloak 
yourself, and come forth.  [EXIT ASOTUS.]  Tailor; bestow
thy absence upon us; and be not prodigal of this secret,
but to a dear customer.  

[EXIT TAILOR.]

RE-ENTER ASOTUS.  

'Tis well enter'd sir.  Stay, you come on too fast; your pace is 
too impetuous.  Imagine this to be the palace of your pleasure, or 
place where your lady is pleased to be seen.  First you present 
yourself, thus: and spying her, you fall off, and walk some two 
turns; in which time, it is to be supposed, your passion hath 
sufficiently whited your face, then, stifling a sigh or two, and 
closing your lips, with a trembling boldness, and bold terror, you 
advance yourself forward.  Prove thus much, I pray you.  

ASO.  Yes, sir; -- pray Jove I can light on it!  Here I come in, 
you say, and present myself? 

AMO.  Good.  

ASO.  And then I spy her, and walk off? 

AMO.  Very good.  

ASO.  Now, sir, I stifle, and advance forward? 

AMO.  Trembling.  

ASO.  Yes, sir, trembling; I shall do it better when I come to it. 
And what must I speak now? 

AMO.  Marry, you shall say; "Dear Beauty", or "sweet Honour" (or by 
what other title you please to remember her), "methinks you are 
melancholy".  This is, if she be alone now, and discompanied.  

ASO.  Well, sir, I'll enter again; her title shall be, "My dear 
Lindabrides".  

AMO.  Lindabrides! 

ASO.  Ay, sir, the emperor Alicandroe's daughter, and the prince 
Meridian's sister, in "the Knight of the Sun"; she should have been 
married to him, but that the princess Claridiana --

AMO.  O, you betray your reading.  

ASO.  Nay, sir, I have read history, I am a little humanitian. 
Interrupt me not, good sir.  "My dear Lindabrides, -- my dear 
Lindabrides, -- my dear Lindabrides, methinks you are melancholy".  

AMO.  Ay, and take her by the rosy finger'd hand.  

ASO.  Must I so: O! -- "My dear Lindabrides, methinks you are 
melancholy".  

AMO.  Or thus sir.  "All variety of divine pleasures, choice 
sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken 
thoughts, attend this dear beauty." 

ASO.  Believe me, that's pretty.  "All variety of divine pleasures, 
choice sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and 
silken thoughts, attend this dear beauty." 

AMO.  And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coily 
recoil, and signify your repulse, you are to re-enforce yourself 
with,
"More than most fair lady,
Let not the rigour of your just disdain
Thus coarsely censure of your servant's zeal."
And withal, protest her to be the only and absolute unparallel'd
creature you do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence,
in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.  

ASO.  This is hard, by my faith.  I'll begin it all again.  

AMO.  Do so, and I will act it for your lady.  

ASO.  Will you vouchsafe, sir?  "All variety of divine pleasures, 
choice sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and 
silken thoughts, attend this dear beauty." 

AMO.  So sir, pray you, away.

ASO.  "More than most fair lady,
Let not the rigour of your just disdain
Thus coarsely censure of your servant's zeal;
I protest you are the only and absolute unapparell'd --

AMO.  Unparallel'd.  

ASO.  Unparallel'd creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, 
and reverence, in this corner of the world, or kingdom." 

AMO.  This is, if she abide you.  But now, put the case she should
be passant when you enter, as thus: you are to frame your gait 
thereafter, and call upon her, "lady, nymph, sweet refuge, star of 
our court."  Then, if she be guardant, here; you are to come on, 
and, laterally disposing yourself, swear by her blushing and 
well-coloured cheek, the bright dye of her hair, her ivory teeth, 
(though they be ebony,) or some such white and innocent oath, to 
induce you.  If regardant, then maintain your station, brisk and 
irpe, show the supple motion of your pliant body, but in chief of 
your knee, and hand, which cannot but arride her proud humour 
exceedingly.  

ASO.  I conceive you sir.  I shall perform all these things in good 
time, I doubt not, they do so hit me.  

AMO.  Well sir, I am your lady; make use of any of these 
beginnings, or some other out of your own invention; and prove how 
you can hold up, and follow it. Say, say.  

ASO.  Yes sir.  "My dear Lindabrides." 

AMO.  No, you affect that Lindabrides too much; and let me tell you 
it is not so courtly.  Your pedant should provide you some parcels 
of French, or some pretty commodity of Italian, to commence with, 
if you would be exotic and exquisite.  

ASO.  Yes, sir, he was at my lodging t'other morning, I gave him a 
doublet.  

AMO.  Double your benevolence, and give him the hose too; clothe 
you his body, he will help to apparel your mind.  But now, see what 
your proper genius can perform alone, without adjection of any 
other Minerva.  

ASO.  I comprehend you sir.  

AMO.  I do stand you, sir; fall back to your first place.  Good, 
passing well: very properly pursued.  

ASO.  "Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient lady, what! are you all 
alone?" 

AMO.  "We would be, sir, if you would leave us." 

ASO.  "I am at your beauty's appointment, bright angel; but --" 

AMO  "What but?" 

ASO.  "No harm, more than most fair feature." 

AMO.  That touch relish'd well.  

ASO.  "But I protest --" 

AMO.  "And why should you protest?" 

ASO.  "For good will, dear esteem'd madam, and I hope your ladyship 
will so conceive of it:
And will, in time, return from your disdain,
And rue the suff'rance of our friendly pain."

AMO.  O, that piece was excellent!  If you could pick out more of 
these play-particles, and, as occasion shall salute you, embroider 
or damask your discourse with them, persuade your soul, it would 
most judiciously commend you.  Come, this was a well-discharged and 
auspicious bout.  Prove the second.  

ASO.  "Lady, I cannot ruffle it in red and yellow." 

AMO.  "Why if you can revel it in white, sir, 'tis sufficient." 

ASO.  "Say you so, sweet lady!  Lan, tede, de, de, de, dant, dant, 
dant, dante.  [SINGS AND DANCES.]  No, in good faith, madam, 
whosever told your ladyship so, abused you; but I would be glad to 
meet your ladyship in a measure." 

AMO.  "Me sir!  Belike you measure me by yourself, then?" 

ASO.  "Would I might, fair feature." 

AMO.  "And what were you the better, if you might?" 

ASO.  "The better it please you to ask, fair lady." 

AMO.  Why, this was ravishing, and most acutely continued.  Well, 
spend not your humour too much, you have now competently exercised 
your conceit: this, once or twice a day, will render you an 
accomplish'd, elaborate, and well-levell'd gallant.  Convey in 
your courting-stock, we will in the heat of this go visit the 
nymphs' chamber.  


ACT IV

SCENE I. -- AN APARTMENT IN THE PALACE.

ENTER PHANTASTE, PHILAUTIA, ARGURION, MORIA, AND CUPID.

PHA.  I would this water would arrive once, our travelling friend 
so commended to us.  

ARG.  So would I, for he has left all us in travail with 
expectation of it.  

PHA.  Pray Jove, I never rise from this couch, if ever I thirsted 
more for a thing in my whole time of being a courtier.  

PHI  Nor I, I'll be sworn: the very mention of it sets my lips in a 
worse heat, than if he had sprinkled them with mercury.  Reach me 
the glass, sirrah.  

CUP.  Here, lady.  

MOR.  They do not peel, sweet charge, do they? 

PHI.  Yes, a little, guardian.  

MOR.  O, 'tis an eminent good sign.  Ever when my lips do so, I am 
sure to have some delicious good drink or other approaching.  

ARG.  Marry, and this may be good for us ladies, for it seems 'tis 
far fet by their stay.  

MOR.  My palate for yours, dear Honour, it shall prove most elegant 
I warrant you.  O, I do fancy this gear that's long a coming, with 
an unmeasurable strain.  

PHA.  Pray thee sit down, Philautia; that rebatu becomes thee 
singularly.  

PHI.  Is it not quaint? 

PHA.  Yes faith.  Methinks, thy servant Hedon is nothing so 
obsequious to thee, as he was wont to be: I know not how, he is 
grown out of his garb a-late, he's warp'd.  

MOR.  In trueness, and so methinks too; he is much converted.  

PHI.  Tut; let him be what he will, 'tis an animal I dream not of. 
This tire, methinks, makes me look very ingeniously, quick, and 
spirited; I should be some Laura, or some Delia, methinks.  

MOR.  As I am wise, fair Honours, that title she gave him, to be 
her Ambition, spoil'd him: before, he was the most propitious and 
observant young novice --

PHA.  No, no, you are the whole heaven awry, guardian; 'tis the 
swaggering coach-horse Anaides draws with him there, has been the 
diverter of him.  

PHI.  For Cupid's sake speak no more of him; would I might never 
dare to look in a mirror again, if I respect ever a marmoset of 'em 
all, otherwise than I would a feather, or my shuttle-cock, to make 
sport with now and then.  

PHA.  Come sit down: troth, and you be good beauties, let's run 
over them all now: Which is the properest man amongst them?  I 
say, the traveller, Amorphus.  

PHI.  O, fie on him, he looks like a Venetian trumpeter in the 
battle of Lepanto, in the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune of 
a country lady that comes ever in the rearward or train of a 
fashion.  

MOR.  I should have judgment in a feature, sweet beauties.  

PHA.  A body would think so, at these years.  

MOR.  And I prefer another now, far before him, a million at least.  

PHA.  Who might that be, guardian? 

MOR.  Marry, fair charge, Anaides.  

PHA.  Anaides! you talk'd of a tune, Philautia; there's one speaks 
in a key, like the opening of some justice's gate, or a postboy's 
horn, as if his voice feared an arrest for some ill words it should 
give, and were loth to come forth.  

PHI.  Ay, and he has a very imperfect face.  

PHA.  Like a sea-monster, that were to ravish Andromeda from the 
rock.  

PHI.  His hands too great too, by at least a straw's breadth.  

PHA.  Nay, he has a worse fault than that too.  

PHI.  A long heel? 

PHA.  That were a fault in a lady, rather than him: no, they say 
he puts off the calves of his legs, with his stockings, every 
night.  

PHI.  Out upon him!  Turn to another of the pictures, for love's 
sake.  What says Argurion?  Whom does she commend afore the rest? 

CUP.  I hope I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.
[ASIDE.]

MOR.  Troth, I made the motion to her ladyship for one to-day, 
i'the presence, but it appear'd she was otherways furnished before: 
she would none.  

PHA.  Who was that Argurion? 

MOR.  Marry, the poor plain gentleman in the black there.  

PHA.  Who, Crites? 

ARG.  Ay, ay, he: a fellow that nobody so much as look'd upon, or 
regarded; and she would have had me done him particular grace.  

PHA.  That was a true trick of yourself, Moria, to persuade 
Argurion to affect the scholar.  

ARG.  Tut, but she shall be no chooser for me.  In good faith, I 
like the citizen's son there, Asotus; methinks none of them all 
come near him.  

PHA.  Not Hedon? 

ARG.  Hedon!  In troth no.  Hedon's a pretty slight courtier, and he 
wears his clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; marry, his face 
is but indifferent, and he has no such excellent body.  No, the 
other is a most delicate youth; a sweet face, a straight body, a 
well-proportion'd leg and foot, a white hand, a tender voice.  

PHI.  How now, Argurion! 

PHA.  O, you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a copy of 
him upon us.  Such a nose were enough to make me love a man, now.  

PHI.  And then his several colours he wears; wherein he flourisheth 
changeably, every day.  

PHA.  O, but his short hair, and his narrow eyes! 

PHI.  Why she doats more palpably upon him than ever his father did 
upon her.  

PHA.  Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it.  If she could 
doat more, 'twere not amiss.  He is an exceeding proper youth, and 
would have made a most neat barber surgeon, if he had been put to 
it in time.  

PHI.  Say you so?  Methinks he looks like a tailor already.  

PHA.  Ay, that had sayed on one of his customer's suits.  His face 
is like a squeezed orange, or --

ARG.  Well ladies, jest on: the best of you both would be glad of 
such a servant.  

MOR.  Ay, I'll be sworn would they, though he be a little 
shame-faced.  

PHA.  Shame-faced, Moria! out upon him.  Your shame-faced servant 
is your only gull.  

MOR.  Go to, beauties, make much of time, and place, and occasion, 
and opportunity, and favourites, and things that belong to them, 
for I'll ensure you they will all relinquish; they cannot endure 
above another year; I know it out of future experience; and 
therefore take exhibition, and warning: I was once a reveller 
myself, and though I speak it, as mine own trumpet, I was then 
esteem'd --

PHI.  The very march-pane of the court, I warrant you.  

PHA.  And all the gallants came about you like flies, did they not? 

MOR.  Go to, they did somewhat; that's no matter now.  

PHA.  Nay, good Moria, be not angry.  Put case, that we four now 
had the grant from Juno, to wish ourselves into what happy estate 
we could, what would you wish to be, Moria? 

MOR.  Who, I! let me see now.  I would wish to be a wise woman, 
and know all the secrets of court, city, and country.  I would know 
what were done behind the arras, what upon the stairs, what in the 
garden, what in the nymphs' chamber, what by barge, and what by 
coach.  I would tell you which courtier were scabbed and which not; 
which lady had her own face to lie with her a-nights and which not; 
who put off their teeth with their clothes in court, who their 
hair, who their complexion; and in which box they put it.  There 
should not a nymph, or a widow, be got with child in the verge, but 
I would guess, within one or two, who was the right father, and in 
what month it was gotten; with what words, and which way.  I would 
tell you which madam loved a monsieur, which a player, which a 
page; who slept with her husband, who with her friend, who with her 
gentleman-usher, who with her horse-keeper, who with her monkey, 
and who with all; yes, and who jigg'd the cock too.  

PHA.  Fie, you'd tell all, Moria!  If I should wish now, it should 
be to have your tongue out.  But what says Philautia?  Who should 
she be? 

PHI.  Troth, the very same I am.  Only I would wish myself a little 
more command and sovereignty; that all the court were subject to my 
absolute beck, and all things in it depending on my look; as if 
there were no other heaven but in my smile, nor other hell but in 
my frown; that I might send for any man I list, and have his head 
cut off when I have done with him, or made an eunuch if he denied 
me; and if I saw a better face than mine own, I might have my 
doctor to poison it.  What would you wish, Phantaste? 

PHA.  Faith, I cannot readily tell you what: but methinks I should 
wish myself all manner of creatures.  Now I would be an empress, 
and by and by a duchess; then a great lady of state, then one of 
your miscellany madams, then a waiting-woman, then your citizen's 
wife, then a coarse country gentlewoman, then a dairy-maid, then a 
shepherd's lass, then an empress again, or the queen of fairies: 
and thus I would prove the vicissitudes and whirl of pleasures 
about and again.  As I were a shepherdess, I would be piped and 
sung to; as a dairy-wench, I would dance at maypoles, and make 
syllabubs; as a country gentlewoman, keep a good house, and come up 
to term to see motions; as a citizen's wife, to be troubled with a 
jealous husband, and put to my shifts; others' miseries should be 
my pleasures.  As a waiting-woman, I would taste my lady's delights 
to her; as a miscellany madam, invent new tires, and go visit 
courtiers; as a great lady, lie a-bed, and have courtiers visit me; 
as a duchess, I would keep my state; and as an empress, I would do 
any thing.  And, in all these shapes, I would ever be follow'd with 
the affections of all that see me.  Marry, I myself would affect 
none; or if I did, it should not be heartily, but so as I might 
save myself in them still, and take pride in tormenting the poor 
wretches.  Or, now I think on't, I would, for one year, wish myself 
one woman; but the richest, fairest, and delicatest in a kingdom, 
the very centre of wealth and beauty, wherein all lines of love 
should meet; and in that person I would prove all manner of 
suitors, of all humours, and of all complexions, and never have any 
two of a sort.  I would see how love, by the power of his object, 
could work inwardly alike, in a choleric man and a sanguine, in a 
melancholic and a phlegmatic, in a fool and a wise man, in a clown 
and a courtier, in a valiant man and a coward; and how he could 
vary outward, by letting this gallant express himself in dumb gaze; 
another with sighing and rubbing his fingers; a third with 
play-ends and pitiful verses; a fourth, with stabbing himself, and 
drinking healths, or writing languishing letters in his blood; a 
fifth, in colour'd ribands and good clothes; with this lord to 
smile, and that lord to court, and the t'other lord to dote, and 
one lord to hang himself.  And, then, I to have a book made of all 
this, which I would call the "Book of Humours," and every night 
read a little piece ere I slept, and laugh at it. -- Here comes 
Hedon.  

ENTER HEDON, ANAIDES, AND MERCURY, WHO RETIRES WITH CUPID TO THE 
BACK OF THE STAGE, WHERE THEY CONVERSE TOGETHER.  

HED.  Save you sweet and clear beauties!  By the spirit that moves 
in me, you are all most pleasingly bestow'd, ladies.  Only I can
take it for no good omen, to find mine Honour so dejected.  

PHI.  You need not fear, sir; I did of purpose humble myself 
against your coming, to decline the pride of my Ambition.  

HED.  Fair Honour, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your 
sweet pleasure, I shall lose that title, I will, as I am Hedon, 
apply myself to your bounties.  

PHI.  That were the next way to dis-title myself of honour.  O, no, 
rather be still Ambitious, I pray you.  

HED.  I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleaseth you 
to be yourself, lady.  Sweet Phantaste, dear Moria, most beautiful 
Argurion --

ANA.  Farewell, Hedon.  

HED.  Anaides, stay, whither go you? 

ANA.  'Slight, what should I do here? an you engross them all for 
your own use, 'tis time for me to seek out.  

HED.  I engross them!  Away, mischief; this is one of your 
extravagant jests now, because I began to salute them by their 
names.

ANA.  Faith, you might have spared us madam Prudence, the guardian 
there, though you had more covetously aim'd at the rest.  

HED.  'Sheart, take them all, man: what speak you to me of aiming 
or covetous? 

ANA.  Ay, say you so! nay, then, have at them: Ladies, here's one 
hath distinguish'd you by your names already: It shall only become 
me to ask how you do.  

HED.  Ods so, was this the design you travail'd with? 

PHA.  Who answers the brazen head? it spoke to somebody.  

ANA.  Lady Wisdom, do you interpret for these puppets? 

MOR.  In truth, and sadness, honours, you are in great offence for 
this.  Go to; the gentleman (I'll undertake with him) is a man of 
fair living, and able to maintain a lady in her two coaches a day, 
besides pages, monkeys, and paraquettoes, with such attendants as 
she shall think meet for her turn; and therefore there is more 
respect requirable, howso'er you seem to connive.  Hark you, sir, 
let me discourse a syllable with you.  I am to say to you, these 
ladies are not of that close and open behaviour as haply you may 
suspend; their carriage is well known to be such as it should be, 
both gentle and extraordinary.  

MER.  O, here comes the other pair.  

ENTER AMORPHUS AND ASOTUS.  

AMO.  That was your father's love, the nymph Argurion.  I would 
have you direct all your courtship thither; if you could but endear 
yourself to her affection, you were eternally engallanted.  

ASO.  In truth, sir! pray Phoebus I prove favoursome in her fair 
eyes.  

AMO.  All divine mixture, and increase of beauty to this bright 
bevy of ladies; and to the male courtiers, compliment and courtesy.  

HED.  In the behalf of the males, I gratify you, Amorphus.  

PHA.  And I of the females.  

AMO.  Succinctly return'd.  I do vail to both your thanks, and kiss 
them; but primarily to yours, most ingenious, acute, and polite 
lady.  

PHI.  Ods my life, how he does all-to-bequalify her! "ingenious, 
acute", and "polite!" as if there was not others in place as
ingenious, acute, and polite as she.  

HED  Yes, but you must know, lady, he cannot speak out of a 
dictionary method.  

PHA.  Sit down, sweet Amorphus.  When will this water come, think
you? 

AMO.  It cannot now be long, fair lady.  

CUP.  Now observe, Mercury.  

ASO.  How, most ambiguous beauty! love you? that I will, by this 
handkerchief.  

MER.  'Slid, he draws his oaths out of his pocket.  

ARG.  But will you be constant? 

ASO.  Constant, madam!  I will not say for constantness; but by 
this purse, which I would be loth to swear by, unless it were 
embroidered, I protest, more than most fair lady, you are the only
absolute, and unparallel'd creature, I do adore, and admire, and 
respect, and reverence in this court, corner of the world, or 
kingdom.  Methinks you are melancholy.  

ARG.  Does your heart speak all this? 

ASO.  Say you?

MER.  O, he is groping for another oath.  

ASO.  Now by this watch -- I marle how forward the day is -- I do 
unfeignedly avow myself -- 'slight, 'tis deeper than I took it, past 
five -- yours entirely addicted, madam.  

ARG.  I require no more, dearest Asotus; henceforth let me call you 
mine, and in remembrance of me, vouchsafe to wear this chain and 
this diamond.  

ASO.  O lord, sweet lady! 

CUP.  There are new oaths for him.  What! doth Hermes taste no 
alteration in all this? 

MER.  Yes, thou hast strook Argurion enamour'd on Asotus, methinks.  

CUP.  Alas, no; I am nobody, I; I can do nothing in this disguise.  

MER.  But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, Cupid.  

CUP.  Not yet; it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.  

ARG.  Nay, these are nothing to the gems I will hourly bestow upon 
thee; be but faithful and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my 
richest bounties: behold, here my bracelets from mine arms.  

ASO.  Not so, good lady, by this diamond.  

ARG.  Take 'em, wear 'em; my jewels, chain of pearl pendants, all I 
have.  

ASO.  Nay then, by this pearl you make me a wanton.  

CUP.  Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in 
swearing? 

MER.  O no, there is a way to wean him from this, the gentleman may 
be reclaim'd.  

CUP.  Ay, if you had the airing of his apparel, coz, I think.  

ASO.  Loving! 'twere pity an I should be living else, believe me. 
Save you, sir, save you, sweet lady, save you, monsieur Anaides, 
save you, dear madam.  

ANA.  Dost thou know him that saluted thee, Hedon? 

HED.  No, some idle Fungoso, that hath got above the cupboard since 
yesterday.  

ANA.  'Slud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me 
as familiarly as if we had known together since the deluge, or the 
first year of Troy action.  

AMO.  A most right-handed and auspicious encounter.  Confine 
yourself to your fortunes.  

PHI.  For sport's sake let's have some Riddles or Purposes, ho! 

PHA.  No, faith, your Prophecies are best, the t'other are stale.  

PHI.  Prophecies! we cannot all sit in at them; we shall make a 
confusion.  No; what call'd you that we had in the forenoon? 

PHA.  Substantives, and adjectives, is it not, Hedon? 

PHI.  Ay that.  Who begins? 

PHA.  I have thought; speak your adjectives, sirs.  

PHI.  But do not you change then.  

PHA.  Not I.  Who says? 

MOR.  Odoriferous.  

PHI.  Popular.  

ARG.  Humble.  

ANA.  White-liver'd.  

HED.  Barbarous.  

AMO.  Pythagorical.  

HED.  Yours, signior.  

ASO.  What must I do, sir? 

AMO.  Give forth your adjective with the rest; as prosperous, good, 
fair, sweet, well --

HED.  Anything that hath not been spoken.  

ASO.  Yes, sir, well-spoken shall be mine.  

PHA.  What, have you all done? 

ALL.  Ay.  

PHA.  Then the substantive is Breeches.  Why "odoriferous" 
breeches, guardian? 

MOR.  Odoriferous, -- because odoriferous: that which contains most 
variety of savour and smell we say is most odoriferous; now 
breeches, I presume, are incident to that variety, and therefore 
odoriferous breeches.  

PHA.  Well, we must take it howsoever.  Who's next?  Philautia? 

PHI.  Popular.

PHA.  Why "popular" breeches? 

PHA.  Marry, that is, when they are not content to be generally 
noted in court, but will press forth on common stages and brokers' 
stalls, to the public view of the world.  

PHA.  Good.  Why "humble" breeches, Argurion? 

ARG.  Humble! because they use to be sat upon; besides, if you tie 
them not up, their property is to fall down about your heels.  

MER.  She has worn the breeches, it seems, which have done so.  

PHA.  But why "white-liver'd?" 

ANA.  Why! are not their linings white?  Besides, when they come 
in swaggering company, and will pocket up any thing, may they not 
properly be said to be white-liver'd? 

PHA.  O yes, we must not deny it.  And why "barbarous," Hedon? 

HED.  Barbarous! because commonly, when you have worn your 
breeches sufficiently, you give them to your barber.  

AMO.  That's good; but how "Pythagorical?" 

PHI.  Ay, Amorphus, why Pythagorical breeches? 

AMO.  O most kindly of all; 'tis a conceit of that fortune, I am 
bold to hug my brain for.  

PHA.  How is it, exquisite Amorphus? 

AMO.  O, I am rapt with it, 'tis so fit, so proper, so happy --

PHI.  Nay, do not rack us thus.  

AMO.  I never truly relish'd myself before.  Give me your ears. 
Breeches Pythagorical, by reason of their transmigration into 
several shapes.  

MOR.  Most rare, in sweet troth.  Marry this young gentleman, for 
his well-spoken --

PHA.  Ay, why "well-spoken" breeches? 

ASO.  Well-spoken!  Marry, well-spoken, because -- whatsoever they 
speak is well-taken; and whatsoever is well-taken is well-spoken.  

MOR.  Excellent! believe me.  

ASO.  Not so, ladies, neither.  

HED.  But why breeches, now? 

PHA.  Breeches, "quasi" bear-riches; when a gallant bears all his 
riches in his breeches.  

AMO.  Most fortunately etymologised.  

PHA.  'Nay, we have another sport afore this, of A thing done, and 
who did it, etc.  

PHI.  Ay, good Phantaste, let's have that: distribute the places.  

PHA.  Why, I imagine, A thing done; Hedon thinks, who did it; 
Moria, with what it was done; Anaides, where it was done; Argurion, 
when it was done; Amorphus, for what cause was it done; you, 
Philautia, what followed upon the doing of it; and this gentleman, 
who would have done it better.  What? is it conceived about? 

ALL.  Yes, yes.  

PHA.  Then speak you, sir.  "Who would have done it better?" 

ASO.  How! does it begin at me? 

PHA.  Yes, sir: this play is called the Crab, it goes backward.  

ASO.  May I not name myself? 

PHI.  If you please, sir, and dare abide the venture of it.  

ASO.  Then I would have done it better, whatever it is.  

PHA.  No doubt on't, sir: a good confidence.  "What followed upon 
the act," Philautia? 

PHI.  A few heat drops, and a month's mirth.  

PHA.  "For what cause," Amorphus? 

AMO.  For the delight of ladies.  

PHA.  "When," Argurion? 

ARG.  Last progress.  

PHA.  "Where," Anaides? 

ANA.  Why, in a pair of pain'd slops.  

PHA.  "With what," Moria? 

MOR.  With a glyster.  

PHA.  "Who," Hedon? 

HED.  A traveller.  

PHA.  Then the thing done was, "An oration was made."  Rehearse. 
An oration was made --

HED.  By a traveller --

MOR.  With a glyster --

ANA.  In a pair of pain'd slops --

ARG.  Last progress --

AMO.  For the delight of ladies --

PHI.  A few heat drops, and a month's mirth followed.  

PHA.  And, this silent gentleman would have done it better.  

ASO.  This was not so good, now.  

PHI.  In good faith, these unhappy pages would be whipp'd for 
staying thus.  

MOR.  Beshrew my hand and my heart else.  

AMO.  I do wonder at their protraction.  

ANA.  Pray Venus my whore have not discover'd herself to the 
rascally boys, and that be the cause of their stay.  

ASO.  I must suit myself with another page: this idle Prosaites 
will never be brought to wait well.  

MOR.  Sir, I have a kinsman I could willingly wish to your service, 
if you will deign to accept of him.  

ASO.  And I shall be glad, most sweet lady, to embrace him: Where 
is he? 

MOR.  I can fetch him, sir, but I would be loth to make you turn 
away your other page.  

ASO.  You shall not most sufficient lady; I will keep both: pray 
you let's go see him.  

ARG.  Whither goes my love? 

ASO.  I'll return presently, I go but to see a page with this lady.  

[EXEUNT ASOTUS AND MORIA.]

ANA.  As sure as fate, 'tis so: she has opened all: a pox of all 
cockatrices!  D--n me, if she have play'd loose with me, I'll cut 
her throat within a hair's breadth, so it may be heal'd again.  

MER.  What, is he jealous of his hermaphrodite? 

CUP.  O, ay, this will be excellent sport.  

PHI.  Phantaste, Argurion! what, you are suddenly struck, methinks!  
For love's sake let's have some music till they come: Ambition, 
reach the lyra, I pray you.  

HED.  Anything to which my Honour shall direct me.  

PHI.  Come Amorphus, cheer up Phantaste.  

AMO.  It shall be my pride, fair lady, to attempt all that is in my 
power.  But here is an instrument that alone is able to infuse soul 
into the most melancholic and dull-disposed creature upon earth. 
O, let me kiss thy fair knees.  Beauteous ears attend it.  

HED.  Will you have "the Kiss" Honour? 

PHI.  Ay, good Ambition.  

HEDON SINGS.

O, that joy so soon should waste!
Or so sweet a bliss
As a kiss
Might not for ever last!
So sugar'd, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on roses,
When the morn herself discloses,
Is not so precious.
O rather than I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might die with kissing.

HED.  I made this ditty, and the note to it, upon a kiss that my 
Honour gave me; how like you it, sir? 

AMO.  A pretty air; in general, I like it well: but in particular, 
your long die-note did arride me most, but it was somewhat too 
long.  I can show one almost of the same nature, but much before 
it, and not so long, in a composition of mine own.  I think I have 
both the note and ditty about me.  

HED.  Pray you, sir, see.  

AMO.  Yes, there is the note; and all the parts, if I misthink not. 
I will read the ditty to your beauties here; but first I am to 
make you familiar with the occasion, which presents itself thus. 
Upon a time, going to take my leave of the emperor, and kiss his 
great hands, there being then present the kings of France and 
Arragon, the dukes of Savoy, Florence, Orleans, Bourbon, Brunswick, 
the Landgrave, Count Palatine; all which had severally feasted me; 
besides infinite more of inferior persons, as counts and others: it 
was my chance (the emperor detained by some exorbitant affair) to 
wait him the fifth part of an hour, or much near it.  In which 
time, retiring myself into a bay-window, the beauteous lady 
Annabel, niece to the empress, and sister to the king of Arragon, 
who having never before eyed me, but only heard the common report 
of my virtue, learning, and travel, fell into that extremity of 
passion for my love, that she there immediately swooned:  
physicians were sent for, she had to her chamber, so to her bed; 
where, languishing some few days, after many times calling upon me, 
with my name in her lips, she expired.  As that (I must mourningly 
say) is the only fault of my fortune, that, as it hath ever been my 
hap to be sued to, by all ladies and beauties, where I have come; 
so I never yet sojourn'd or rested in that place or part of the 
world, where some high-born, admirable, fair feature died not for 
my love.  

MER.  O, the sweet power of travel! -- Are you guilty of this, 
Cupid? 

CUP.  No, Mercury; and that his page Cos knows, if he were here 
present to be sworn.  

PHI.  But how doth this draw on the ditty, sir? 

MER.  O, she is too quick with him; he hath not devised that yet.  

AMO.  Marry, some hour before she departed, she bequeath'd to me 
this glove: which golden legacy, the emperor himself took care to 
send after me, in six coaches, cover'd all with black-velvet, 
attended by the state of his empire; all which he freely presented 
me with: and I reciprocally (out of the same bounty) gave to the 
lords that brought it: only reserving the gift of the deceased 
lady, upon which I composed this ode, and set it to my most 
affected instrument, the lyra.  

Thou more then most sweet glove,
Unto my more sweet love,
Suffer me to store with kisses
This empty lodging, that now misses
The pure rosy hand, that wear thee,
Whiter than the kid that bare thee:
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
Cupid's self hath kiss'd it ofter
Than e'er he did his mother's doves.
Supposing her the queen of loves
That was thy mistress, BEST OF GLOVES.

MER.  Blasphemy, blasphemy, Cupid! 

CUP.  I'll revenge it time enough, Hermes.  

PHI.  Good Amorphus, let's hear it sung.  

AMO.  I care not to admit that, since it pleaseth Philautia to 
request it.  

HED.  Here, sir.  

AMO.  Nay, play it, I pray you; you do well, you do well.
[HE SINGS IT.] -- How like you it, sir? 

HED.  Very well, in troth.  

AMO.  But very well!  O, you are a mere mammothrept in judgment, 
then.  Why, do not observe how excellently the ditty is affected in 
every place? that I do not marry a word of short quantity to a 
long note? nor an ascending syllable to a descending tone?  
Besides, upon the word "best" there, you see how I do enter with an 
odd minum, and drive it through the brief; which no intelligent 
musician, I know, but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary, 
and pleasing.  

MER.  And yet not fit to lament the death of a lady, for all this.  

CUP.  Tut, here be they will swallow anything.  

PHA.  Pray you, let me have a copy of it, Amorphus.  

PHI.  And me too; in troth I like it exceedingly.  

AMO.  I have denied it to princes; nevertheless to you, the true 
female twins of perfection, I am won to depart withal.  

HED.  I hope, I shall have my Honour's copy.  

PHA.  You are Ambitious in that, Hedon.

RE-ENTER ANAIDES.  

AMO.  How now, Anaides! what is it hath conjured up this  
distemperature in the circle of your face? 

ANA.  Why, what have you to do?  A pox upon your filthy travelling 
face! hold your tongue.  

HED.  Nay, dost hear, Mischief? 

ANA.  Away, musk-cat! 

AMO.  I say to thee thou art rude, debauch'd, impudent, coarse, 
unpolish'd, a frapler, and base.  

HED.  Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a 
year's haunting of ordinaries wrought in this fellow! that came 
with a tufftaffata jerkin to town but the other day, and a pair of 
pennyless hose, and now he is turn'd Hercules, he wants but a club.  

ANA.  Sir, you with the pencil on your chin; I will garter my hose 
with your guts, and that shall be all.  [EXIT.]

MER.  'Slid, what rare fireworks be here? flash, flash.  

PHA.  What is the matter Hedon? can you tell? 

HED.  Nothing, but that he lacks crowns, and thinks we'll lend him 
some to be friends.  

RE-ENTER ASOTUS AND MORIA, WITH MORUS.  

ASO.  Come sweet lady, in good truth I'll have it, you shall not 
deny me.  Morus, persuade your aunt I may have her picture, by any 
means.  

MORUS.  Yea, sir: good aunt now, let him have it; he will use me 
the better; if you love me do, good aunt.  

MOR.  Well, tell him he shall have it.  

MORUS.  Master, you shall have it, she says.  

ASO.  Shall I? thank her, good page.  

CUP.  What, has he entertained the fool? 

MER.  Ay, he'll wait close, you shall see, though the beggar hang 
off a while.  

MORUS.  Aunt, my master thanks you.  

MOR.  Call him hither.  

MORUS.  Yes; master.  

MOR.  Yes, in verity, and gave me this purse, and he has promised 
me a most fine dog; which he will have drawn with my picture, he 
says: and desires most vehemently to be known to your ladyships.  

PHA.  Call him hither, 'tis good groping such a gull.  

MORUS.  Master Asotus, master Asotus! 

ASO.  For love's sake, let me go: you see I am call'd to the 
ladies.  

ARG.  Wilt thou forsake me, then? 

ASO.  Od so! what would you have me do? 

MOR.  Come hither, master Asotus. -- I do ensure your ladyships, he 
is a gentleman of a very worthy desert: and of a most bountiful 
nature. -- You must shew and insinuate yourself responsible, and 
equivalent now to my commendment. -- Good honours grace him.  

ASO.  I protest, more then most fair ladies, "I do wish all variety 
of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet music, rich fare, brave 
attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts, attend these fair 
beauties".  Will it please your ladyship to wear this chain of 
pearl, and this diamond, for my sake? 

ARG.  O! 

ASO.  And you, madam, this jewel and pendants? 

ARG.  O! 

PHA.  We know not how to deserve these bounties, out of so slight 
merit, Asotus.  

PHI.  No, in faith, but there's my glove for a favour.  

PHA.  And soon after the revels, I will bestow a garter on you.  

ASO.  O lord, ladies! it is more grace than ever I could have 
hoped, but that it pleaseth your ladyships to extend.  I protest
it is enough, that you but take knowledge of my -- if your
ladyships want embroidered gowns, tires of any fashion, rebatues, 
jewels, or carcanets, any thing whatsoever, if you vouchsafe to 
accept --

CUP.  And for it they will help you to shoe-ties, and devices.  

ASO.  I cannot utter myself, dear beauties, but; you can conceive --

ARG.  O! 

PHA.  Sir, we will acknowledge your service, doubt not -- 
henceforth, you shall be no more Asotus to us, but our goldfinch, 
and we your cages.  

ASO.  O Venus! madams! how shall I deserve this? if I were but 
made acquainted with Hedon, now, -- I'll try: pray you, away.  

[TO ARGURION.]

MER.  How he prays money to go away from him.  

ASO.  Amorphus, a word with you; here's a watch I would bestow upon 
you, pray you make me known to that gallant.  

AMO.  That I will, sir. -- Monsieur Hedon, I must entreat you to 
exchange knowledge with this gentleman.  

HED.  'Tis a thing, next to the water, we expect, I thirst after, 
sir.  Good monsieur Asotus.  

ASO.  Good monsieur Hedon, I would be glad to be loved of men of 
your rank and spirit, I protest.  Please you to accept this pair of 
bracelets, sir; they are not worth the bestowing --

MER.  O Hercules, how the gentleman purchases, this must needs 
bring Argurion to a consumption.  

HED.  Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such bounty, I fear.  

ASO.  O Venus, sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient.  And if 
at any time you need my bill, or my bond --

ARG.  O!  O!  [SWOONS.]

AMO.  Help the lady there! 

MOR.  Gods-dear, Argurion! madam, how do you? 

ARG.  Sick.  

PHA.  Have her forth, and give her air.  

ASO.  I come again straight, ladies.  

[EXEUNT ASOTUS, MORUS, AND ARGURION.]

MER.  Well, I doubt all the physic he has will scarce recover her; 
she's too far spent.  

RE-ENTER ANAIDES WITH GELAIA, PROSAITES, AND COS, WITH THE BOTTLES.  

PHI.  O here's the water come; fetch glasses, page.  

GEL.  Heart of my body, here's a coil, indeed, with your jealous 
humours! nothing but whore and bitch, and all the villainous 
swaggering names you can think on!  'Slid, take your bottle, and put 
it in your guts for me, I'll see you pox'd ere I follow you any 
longer.  

ANA.  Nay, good punk, sweet rascal; d--n me, if I am jealous now.  

GEL.  That's true, indeed, pray let's go.  

MOR.  What's the matter there? 

GEL.  'Slight, he has me upon interrogatories, (nay, my mother 
shall know how you use me,) where I have been? and why I should 
stay so long? and how is't possible? and withal calls me at his 
pleasure I know not how many cockatrices, and things.  

MOR.  In truth and sadness, these are no good epitaphs Anaides, to 
bestow upon any gentlewoman; and I'll ensure you if I had known you 
would have dealt thus with my daughter, she should never have 
fancied you so deeply as she has done.  Go to.  

ANA.  Why, do you hear, mother Moria? heart! 

MOR.  Nay, I pray you, sir, do not swear.  

ANA.  Swear! why? 'sblood, I have sworn afore now, I hope.  Both 
you and your daughter mistake me.  I have not honour'd Arete, that 
is held the worthiest lady in the court, next to Cynthia, with half 
that observance and respect, as I have done her in private, 
howsoever outwardly I have carried myself careless, and negligent. 
Come, you are a foolish punk, and know not when you are well 
employed.  Kiss me, come on; do it, I say.  

MOR.  Nay, indeed, I must confess, she is apt to misprision.  But I 
must have you leave it, minion.  

RE-ENTER ASOTUS.

AMO.  How now, Asotus! how does the lady? 

ASO.  Faith, ill.  I have left my page with her, at her lodging.  

HED.  O, here's the rarest water that ever was tasted: fill him 
some.  

PRO.  What! has my master a new page? 

MER.  Yes, a kinsman of the lady Moria's: you must wait better 
now, or you are cashiered, Prosaites.  

ANA.  Come, gallants; you must pardon my foolish humour; when I am 
angry, that any thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight.  Here, 
I drink to you.  

PHI.  O, that we had five or six bottles more of this liquor! 

PHA.  Now I commend your judgment, Amorphus: --
[KNOCKING WITHIN.]
Who's that knocks? look, page.  [EXIT COS.]

MOR.  O, most delicious; a little of this would make Argurion well.  

PHA.  O, no, give her no cold drink, by any means.  

ANA.  'Sblood, this water is the spirit of wine, I'll be hang'd 
else.  

RE-ENTER COS WITH ARETE.  

COS.  Here's the lady Arete, madam.  

ARE.  What, at your bever, gallants? 

MOR.  Will't please your ladyship to drink? 'tis of the New 
Fountain water.  

ARE.  Not I, Moria, I thank you. -- Gallants, you are for this 
night free to your peculiar delights; Cynthia will have no sports: 
when she is pleased to come forth, you shall have knowledge.  In 
the mean time, I could wish you did provide for solemn revels, and 
some unlooked for device of wit, to entertain her, against she 
should vouchsafe to grace your pastimes with her presence.  

AMO.  What say you to a masque? 

HED.  Nothing better, if the project were new and rare.  

ARE.  Why, I'll send for Crites, and have his advice: be you ready 
in your endeavours: he shall discharge you of the inventive part.  

PHA.  But will not your ladyship stay? 

ARE.  Not now, Phantaste.  [EXIT.]

PHI.  Let her go, I pray you, good lady Sobriety, I am glad we are 
rid of her.  

PHA.  What a set face the gentlewoman has, as she were still going 
to a sacrifice! 

PHI.  O, she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a look.  

MOR.  Of all nymphs i' the court, I cannot away with her; 'tis the 
coarsest thing! 

PHI.  I wonder how Cynthia can affect her so above the rest.  Here 
be they are every way as fair as she, and a thought, fairer, I 
trow.  

PHA.  Ay, and as ingenious and conceited as she.  

MOR.  Ay, and as politic as she, for all she sets such a forehead 
on't.  

PHI.  Would I were dead, if I would change to be Cynthia.  

PHA.  Or I.  

MOR.  Or I.  

AMO.  And there's her minion, Crites: why his advice more than 
Amorphus?  Have I not invention afore him? Learning to better 
that invention above him? and infanted with pleasant travel --

ANA.  Death, what talk you of his learning? he understands no more 
than a schoolboy; I have put him down myself a thousand times, by 
this air, and yet I never talk'd with him but twice in my life: 
you never saw his like.  I could never get him to argue with me but 
once; and then because I could not construe an author I quoted at 
first sight, he went away, and laughed at me.  By Hercules, I scorn 
him, as I do the sodden nymph that was here even now; his mistress, 
Arete: and I love myself for nothing else.  

HED.  I wonder the fellow does not hang himself, being thus 
scorn'd and contemn'd of us that are held the most accomplish'd 
society of gallants.  

MER.  By yourselves, none else.  

HED.  I protest, if I had no music in me, no courtship; that I were 
not a reveller and could dance, or had not those excellent 
qualities that give a man life and perfection, but a mere poor 
scholar as he is, I think I should make some desperate way with 
myself; whereas now, -- would I might never breathe more, if I do 
know that creature in this kingdom with whom I would change.  

CUP.  This is excellent!  Well, I must alter all this soon.  

MER.  Look you do, Cupid.  The bottles have wrought, it seems.  

ASO.  O, I am sorry the revels are crost.  I should have tickled it 
soon.  I did never appear till then.  'Slid, I am the neatliest-made 
gallant i' the company, and have the best presence; and my dancing 
-- well, I know what our usher said to me last time I was at the 
school: Would I might have led Philautia in the measures, an it 
had been the gods' will!  I am most worthy, I am sure.  

RE-ENTER MORUS.  

MORUS.  Master, I can tell you news; the Lady kissed me yonder, and 
played with me, and says she loved you once as well as she does me, 
but that you cast her off.  

ASO.  Peace, my most esteemed page.  

MORUS.  Yes.  

ASO.  What luck is this, that our revels are dash'd, now was I 
beginning to glister in the very highway of preferment.  An Cynthia 
had but seen me dance a strain, or do but one trick, I had been 
kept in court, I should never have needed to look towards my 
friends again.  

AMO.  Contain yourself, you were a fortunate young man, if you knew 
your own good; which I have now projected, and will presently 
multiply upon you.  Beauties and valours, your vouchsafed applause 
to a motion.  The humorous Cynthia hath, for this night, withdrawn 
the light of your delight.  

PHA.  'Tis true, Amorphus: what may we do to redeem it? 

AMO.  Redeem that we cannot, but to create a new flame is in our 
power.  Here is a gentleman, my scholar, whom, for some private 
reasons me specially moving, I am covetous to gratify with title of 
master in the noble and subtile science of courtship: for which 
grace, he shall this night, in court, and in the long gallery, hold 
his public act, by open challenge, to all masters of the mystery 
whatsoever, to play at the four choice and principal weapons 
thereof, viz., "the Bare Accost, the Better Regard, the Solemn 
Address," and "the Perfect Close."  What say you? 

ALL.  Excellent, excellent, Amorphus.  

AMO.  Well, let us then take our time by the forehead: I will 
instantly have bills drawn, and advanced in every angle of the 
court. -- Sir, betray not your too much joy. -- Anaides, we must 
mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance, monsieur Asotus.  

ANA.  I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, Amorphus.  

ASO.  Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you, sir.  Nay, I 
begin to know myself now.  

AMO.  O, you must continue your bounties.  

ASO.  Must I?  Why, I'll give him this ruby on my finger.  Do you 
hear sir?  I do heartily wish your acquaintance, and I partly know 
myself worthy of it; please you, sir, to accept this poor ruby in a 
ring, sir.  The poesy is of my own device, "Let this blush for me," 
sir.

ANA.  So it must for me too, for I am not asham'd to take it.  

MORUS.  Sweet man!  By my troth, master, I love you; will you love 
me too, for my aunt's sake?  I'll wait well, you shall see.  I'll 
still be here.  Would I might never stir, but you are a fine man in 
these clothes; master, shall I have them when you have done with 
them? 

ASO.  As for that, Morus, thou shalt see more hereafter; in the 
mean time, by this air, or by this feather, I'll do as much for 
thee, as any gallant shall do for his page, whatsoever, in this 
court, corner of the world, or kingdom.  

[EXEUNT ALL BUT THE PAGES.]

MER.  I wonder this gentleman should affect to keep a fool: 
methinks he makes sport enough with himself.  

CUP.  Well, Prosaites, 'twere good you did wait closer.  

PRO.  Ay, I'll look to it; 'tis time.  

COS.  The revels would have been most sumptuous to-night, if they 
had gone forward.  [EXIT.]

MER.  They must needs, when all the choicest singularities of the 
court were up in pantofles; ne'er a one of them but was able to 
make a whole show of itself.  

ASO.  [WITHIN.]  Sirrah, a torch, a torch! 

PRO.  O, what a call is there!  I will have a canzonet made, with 
nothing in it but sirrah; and the burthen shall be, I come.
[EXIT.]

MER.  How now, Cupid, how do you like this change? 

CUP.  Faith, the thread of my device is crack'd, I may go sleep 
till the revelling music awake me.  

MER.  And then, too, Cupid, without you had prevented the fountain. 
Alas, poor god, that remembers not self-love to be proof against 
the violence of his quiver!  Well, I have a plot against these 
prizers, for which I must presently find out Crites, and with his 
assistance pursue it to a high strain of laughter, or Mercury hath 
lost of his metal.  

[EXEUNT.]


ACT V

SCENE I. -- THE SAME.

ENTER MERCURY AND CRITES.

MER.  It is resolved on, Crites, you must do it.

CRI.  The grace divinest Mercury hath done me,
In this vouchsafed discovery of himself,
Binds my observance in the utmost term
Of satisfaction to his godly will:
Though I profess, without the affectation
Of an enforced and form'd austerity,
I could be willing to enjoy no place
With so unequal natures.

MER.  We believe it.
But for our sake, and to inflict just pains
On their prodigious follies, aid us now:
No man is presently made bad with ill.
And good men, like the sea, should still maintain
Their noble taste, in midst of all fresh humours
That flow about them, to corrupt their streams,
Bearing no season, much less salt of goodness.
It is our purpose, Crites, to correct,
And punish, with our laughter, this night's sport,
Which our court-dors so heartily intend:
And by that worthy scorn, to make them know
How far beneath the dignity of man
Their serious and most practised actions are.

CRI.  Ay, but though Mercury can warrant out
His undertakings, and make all things good,
Out of the powers of his divinity,
Th' offence will be return'd with weight on me,
That am a creature so despised and poor;
When the whole court shall take itself abused
By our ironical confederacy.

MER.  You are deceived.  The better race in court,
That have the true nobility call'd virtue,
Will apprehend it, as a grateful right
Done to their separate merit; and approve
The fit rebuke of so ridiculous heads,
Who, with their apish customs and forced garbs,
Would bring the name of courtier in contempt,
Did it not live unblemish'd in some few,
Whom equal Jove hath loved, and Phoebus form'd
Of better metal, and in better mould.

CRI.  Well, since my leader-on is Mercury,
I shall not fear to follow.  If I fall,
My proper virtue shall be my relief,
That follow'd such a cause, and such a chief.

[EXEUNT.]


SCENE II. -- ANOTHER ROOM IN THE SAME.

ENTER ASOTUS AND AMORPHUS.

ASO.  No more, if you love me, good master; you are incompatible to 
live withal: send me for the ladies! 

AMO.  Nay, but intend me.  

ASO.  Fear me not; I warrant you, sir.  

AMO.  Render not yourself a refractory on the sudden.  I can allow, 
well, you should repute highly, heartily, and to the most, of your 
own endowments; it gives you forth to the world the more assured: 
but with reservation of an eye, to be always turn'd dutifully back 
upon your teacher.  

ASO.  Nay, good sir, leave it to me.  Trust me with trussing all 
the points of this action, I pray.  'Slid, I hope we shall find wit 
to perform the science as well as another.  

AMO.  I confess you to be of an apted and docible humour.  Yet 
there are certain punctilios, or (as I may more nakedly insinuate 
them) certain intrinsecate strokes and wards, to which your 
activity is not yet amounted, as your gentle dor in colours.  For 
supposition, your mistress appears here in prize, ribanded with 
green and yellow; now, it is the part of every obsequious servant, 
to be sure to have daily about him copy and variety of colours, to 
be presently answerable to any hourly or half-hourly change in his 
mistress's revolution --

ASO.  I know it, sir.  

AMO.  Give leave, I pray you -- which, if your antagonist, or 
player against you, shall ignorantly be without, and yourself can 
produce, you give him the dor.  

ASO.  Ay, ay, sir.  

AMO.  Or, if you can possess your opposite, that the green your 
mistress wears, is her rejoicing or exultation in his service; the 
yellow, suspicion of his truth, from her height of affection: and 
that he, greenly credulous, shall withdraw thus, in private, and 
from the abundance of his pocket (to displace her jealous conceit) 
steal into his hat the colour, whose blueness doth express 
trueness, she being not so, nor so affected; you give him the dor.  

ASO.  Do not I know it, sir? 

AMO.  Nay, good -- swell not above your understanding.  There is 
yet a third dor in colours.  

ASO.  I know it too, I know it.  

AMO.  Do you know it too? what is it? make good your knowledge.  

ASO.  Why it is -- no matter for that.  

AMO.  Do it, on pain of the dor.  

ASO.  Why; what is't, say you? 

AMO.  Lo, you have given yourself the dor.  But I will remonstrate 
to you the third dor, which is not, as the two former dors, 
indicative, but deliberative: as how? as thus.  Your rival is, 
with a dutiful and serious care, lying in his bed, meditating how 
to observe his mistress, dispatcheth his lacquey to the chamber 
early, to know what her colours are for the day, with purpose to 
apply his wear that day accordingly: you lay wait before, 
preoccupy the chamber-maid, corrupt her to return false colours; he 
follows the fallacy, comes out accoutred to his believed 
instructions; your mistress smiles, and you give him the dor.  

ASO.  Why, so I told you, sir, I knew it.  

AMO.  Told me!  It is a strange outrecuidance, your humour too much 
redoundeth.  

ASO.  Why, sir, what, do you think you know more? 

AMO.  I know that a cook may as soon and properly be said to smell 
well, as you to be wise.  I know these are most clear and clean 
strokes.  But then, you have your passages and imbrocatas in 
courtship; as the bitter bob in wit; the reverse in face or 
wry-mouth; and these more subtile and secure offenders.  I will 
example unto you: Your opponent makes entry as you are engaged 
with your mistress.  You seeing him, close in her ear with this 
whisper, "Here comes your baboon, disgrace him"; and withal 
stepping off, fall on his bosom, and turning to her, politely, 
aloud say, Lady, regard this noble gentleman, a man rarely parted, 
second to none in this court; and then, stooping over his shoulder, 
your hand on his breast, your mouth on his backside, you give him 
the reverse stroke, with this sanna, or stork's-bill, which makes 
up your wit's bob most bitter.  

ASO.  Nay, for heaven's sake, teach me no more.  I know all as well 
-- 'Slid, if I did not, why was I nominated? why did you choose me?  
why did the ladies prick out me?  I am sure there were other 
gallants.  But me of all the rest!  By that light, and, as I am a 
courtier, would I might never stir, but 'tis strange.  Would to the 
lord the ladies would come once! 

ENTER MORPHIDES.  

MORP.  Signior, the gallants and ladies are at hand.  Are you  
ready, sir? 

AMO.  Instantly.  Go, accomplish your attire: [EXIT ASOTUS.]
Cousin Morphides, assist me to make good the door with your 
officious tyranny.  

CITIZEN.  [WITHIN.]  By your leave, my masters there, pray you 
let's come by.  

PAGES.  [WITHIN.]  You by! why should you come by more than we? 

CITIZEN'S WIFE.  [WITHIN.]  Why, sir! because he is my brother 
that plays the prizes.  

MORP.  Your brother! 

CITIZEN.  [WITHIN.]  Ay, her brother, sir, and we must come in.  

TAILOR. [WITHIN.]  Why, what are you? 

CITIZEN. [WITHIN.]  I am her husband, sir.  

TAILOR. [WITHIN.]  Then thrust forward your head.  

AMO.  What tumult is there? 

MORP.  Who's there?  bear back there!  Stand from the door! 

AMO.  Enter none but the ladies and their hang-byes. --

ENTER PHANTASTE, PHILAUTIA, ARGURION, MORIA, HEDON, AND ANAIDES, 
INTRODUCING TWO LADIES.  

Welcome beauties, and your kind shadows.  

HED.  This country lady, my friend, good signior Amorphus.  

ANA.  And my cockatrice here.  

AMO.  She is welcome.  

THE CITIZEN, AND HIS WIFE, PAGES, ETC., APPEAR AT THE DOOR.  

MORP.  Knock those same pages there; and, goodman coxcomb the 
citizen, who would you speak withal? 

WIFE.  My brother.  

AMO.  With whom? your brother!

MORP.  Who is your brother? 

WIFE.  Master Asotus.  

AMO.  Master Asotus! is he your brother? he is taken up with 
great persons; he is not to know you to-night.  

RE-ENTER ASOTUS HASTILY.  

ASO.  O Jove, master! an there come e'er a citizen gentlewoman in 
my name, let her have entrance, I pray you: it is my sister.  

WIFE.  Brother! 

CIT.  [THRUSTING IN.]  Brother, master Asotus! 

ASO.  Who's there? 

WIFE.  'Tis I, brother.  

ASO.  Gods me, there she is! good master, intrude her.  

MORP.  Make place! bear back there! 

ENTER CITIZEN'S WIFE.  

AMO.  Knock that simple fellow there.  

WIFE.  Nay, good sir, it is my husband.  

MORP.  The simpler fellow he. -- Away! back with your head, sir! 
[PUSHES THE CITIZEN BACK.]

ASO.  Brother, you must pardon your non-entry: husbands are not 
allow'd here, in truth.  I'll come home soon with my sister: pray 
you meet us with a lantern, brother.  Be merry, sister: I shall 
make you laugh anon.  [EXIT.]

PHA.  Your prizer is not ready, Amorphus.  

AMO.  Apprehend your places; he shall be soon, and at all points.  

ANA.  Is there any body come to answer him? shall we have any 
sport? 

AMO.  Sport of importance; howsoever, give me the gloves.  

HED.  Gloves! why gloves, signior? 

PHI.  What's the ceremony? 

AMO.  [DISTRIBUTING GLOVES.]  Beside their received fitness, at all 
prizes, they are here properly accommodate to the nuptials of my 
scholar's 'haviour to the lady Courtship.  Please you apparel your 
hands.  Madam Phantaste, madam Philautia, guardian, signior Hedon, 
signior Anaides, gentlemen all, ladies.  

ALL.  Thanks, good Amorphus.  

AMO.  I will now call forth my provost, and present him.  
[EXIT.]

ANA.  Heart! why should not we be masters as well as he? 

HED.  That's true, and play our masters' prizes as well as the 
t'other? 

MOR.  In sadness, for using your court-weapons, methinks you may.  

PHA.  Nay, but why should not we ladies play our prizes, I pray?  I 
see no reason but we should take them down at their own weapons.  

PHI.  Troth, and so we may, if we handle them well.  

WIFE.  Ay, indeed, forsooth, madam, if 'twere in the city, we would 
think foul scorn but we would, forsooth.  

PHA.  Pray you, what should we call your name? 

WIFE.  My name is Downfall.  

HED.  Good mistress Downfall!  I am sorry your husband could not 
get in.  

WIFE.  'Tis no matter for him, sir.  

ANA.  No, no, she has the more liberty for herself.  

[A FLOURISH.]

PHA.  Peace, peace! they come.  

RE-ENTER AMORPHUS, INTRODUCING ASOTUS IN A FULL-DRESS SUIT.  

AMO.  So, keep up your ruff; the tincture of your neck is not all 
so pure, but it will ask it.  Maintain your sprig upright; your 
cloke on your half-shoulder falling; so: I will read your bill, 
advance it, and present you. -- Silence! 

"Be it known to all that profess courtship, by these presents (from 
the white satin reveller, to the cloth of tissue and bodkin) that 
we, Ulysses-Polytropus-Amorphus, master of the noble and subtile 
science of courtship, do give leave and licence to our provost, 
Acolastus-Polypragmon-Asotus, to play his master's prize, against 
all masters whatsoever, in this subtile mystery, at these four, the 
choice and most cunning weapons of court-compliment, viz. the BARE 
ACCOST; the BETTER REGARD; the SOLEMN ADDRESS; and the 
PERFECT CLOSE.  These are therefore to give notice to all comers, 
that he, the said Acolastus-Polypragmon-Asotus, is here present (by 
the help of his mercer, tailor, milliner, sempster, and so forth) 
at his designed hour, in this fair gallery, the present day of this 
present month, to perform and do his uttermost for the achievement 
and bearing away of the prizes, which are these: viz.  For the 
Bare Accost, two wall-eyes in a face forced: for the Better 
Regard, a face favourably simpering, with a fan waving: for the 
Solemn Address, two lips wagging, and never a wise word: for the 
Perfect Close, a wring by the hand, with a banquet in a corner. 
And Phoebus save Cynthia!" 

Appeareth no man yet, to answer the prizer? no voice? -- Music, 
give them their summons.  

[MUSIC.]

PHA.  The solemnity of this is excellent.  

AMO.  Silence!  Well, I perceive your name is their terror, and 
keepeth them back.  

ASO.  I'faith, master, let's go; no body comes.  'Victus, victa, 
victum; victi, victae, victi -- let's be retrograde.  

AMO.  Stay.  That were dispunct to the ladies.  Rather ourself 
shall be your encounter.  Take your state up to the wall; and, 
lady, [LEADING MORIA TO THE STATE.] may we implore you to stand
forth, as first term or bound to our courtship.  

HED.  'Fore heaven, 'twill shew rarely.  

AMO.  Sound a charge.  [A CHARGE.]

ANA.  A pox on't!  Your vulgar will count this fabulous and 
impudent now: by that candle, they'll never conceit it.  

[THEY ACT THEIR ACCOST SEVERALLY TO MORIA.] 

PHA.  Excellent well! admirable! 

PHI.  Peace! 

HED.  Most fashionably, believe it.  

PHI.  O, he is a well-spoken gentleman.  

PHA.  Now the other.  

PHI.  Very good.  

HED.  For a scholar, Honour.  

ANA.  O, 'tis too Dutch.  He reels too much.  [A FLOURISH.]  

HED.  This weapon is done.  

AMO.  No, we have our two bouts at every weapon; expect.  

CRI.  [WITHIN.]  Where be these gallants, and their brave prizer 
here? 

MORP.  Who's there? bear back; keep the door.  

ENTER CRITES, INTRODUCING MERCURY FANTASTICALLY DRESSED.  

AMO.  What are you, sir? 

CRI.  By your license, grand-master. -- Come forward, sir.  
[TO MERCURY.]

ANA.  Heart! who let in that rag there amongst us?  Put him out, 
an impecunious creature.  

HED.  Out with him.  

MORP.  Come, sir.  

AMO.  You must be retrograde.  

CRI.  Soft, sir, I am truchman, and do flourish before this 
monsieur, or French-behaved gentleman, here; who is drawn hither by 
report of your chartels, advanced in court, to prove his fortune 
with your prizer, so he may have fair play shewn him, and the 
liberty to choose his stickler.  

AMO.  Is he a master? 

CRI.  That, sir, he has to shew here; and confirmed under the hands 
of the most skilful and cunning complimentaries alive: Please you 
read, sir.  [GIVES HIM A CERTIFICATE.]

AMO.  What shall we do? 

ANA.  Death! disgrace this fellow in the black stuff, whatever you 
do.  

AMO.  Why, but he comes with the stranger.  

HED.  That's no matter: he is our own countryman.  

ANA.  Ay, and he is a scholar besides.  You may disgrace him here 
with authority.  

AMO.  Well, see these first.  

ASO.  Now shall I be observed by yon scholar, till I sweat again; I 
would to Jove it were over.  

CRI.  [TO MERCURY.]  Sir, this is the wight of worth, that dares 
you to the encounter.  A gentleman of so pleasing and ridiculous a 
carriage; as, even standing, carries meat in the mouth, you see; 
and, I assure you, although no bred courtling, yet a most 
particular man, of goodly havings, well-fashion'd 'haviour, and of 
as hardened and excellent a bark as the most naturally qualified 
amongst them, inform'd, reform'd, and transform'd, from his 
original citycism; by this elixir, or mere magazine of man.  And, 
for your spectators, you behold them what they are: the most 
choice particulars in court: this tells tales well; this provides 
coaches; this repeats jests; this presents gifts; this holds up the 
arras; this takes down from horse; this protests by this light; 
this swears by that candle; this delighteth; this adoreth: yet all 
but three men.  Then, for your ladies, the most proud, witty 
creatures, all things apprehending, nothing understanding, 
perpetually laughing, curious maintainers of fools, mercers, and 
minstrels, costly to be kept, miserably keeping, all disdaining but 
their painter and apothecary, 'twixt whom and them there is this 
reciprock commerce, their beauties maintain their painters, and 
their painters their beauties.  

MER.  Sir, you have plaid the painter yourself, and limn'd them to 
the life.  I desire to deserve before them.  

AMO.  [RETURNING THE CERTIFICATE.]  This is authentic.  We must 
resolve to entertain the monsieur, howsoever we neglect him.  

HED.  Come, let's all go together, and salute him.  

ANA.  Content, and not look on the other.  

AMO.  Well devised; and a most punishing disgrace.  

HED.  On.  

AMO.  Monsieur, we must not so much betray ourselves to 
discourtship, as to suffer you to be longer unsaluted: please you 
to use the state ordain'd for the opponent; in which nature, 
without envy, we receive you.  

HED.  And embrace you.  

ANA.  And commend us to you, sir.  

PHI.  Believe it, he is a man of excellent silence.  

PHA.  He keeps all his wit for action.  

ANA.  This hath discountenanced our scholaris, most richly.  

HED.  Out of all emphasis.  The monsieur sees we regard him not.  

AMO.  Hold on; make it known how bitter a thing it is not to be 
look'd on in court.  

HED.  'Slud, will he call him to him yet!  Does not monsieur 
perceive our disgrace? 

ANA.  Heart! he is a fool, I see.  We have done ourselves wrong to 
grace him.  

HED.  'Slight, what an ass was I to embrace him! 

CRI.  Illustrious and fearful judges --

HED.  Turn away, turn away.  

CRI.  It is the suit of the strange opponent (to whom you ought not 
to turn your tails, and whose noses I must follow) that he may have 
the justice, before he encounter his respected adversary, to see 
some light stroke of his play, commenced with some other.  

HED.  Answer not him, but the stranger: we will not believe him.  

AMO.  I will demand him, myself.  

CRI.  O dreadful disgrace, if a man were so foolish to feel it.  

AMO.  Is it your suit, monsieur, to see some prelude of my scholar?  
Now, sure the monsieur wants language --

HED.  And take upon him to be one of the accomplished!  'Slight, 
that's a good jest; would we could take him with that nullity. -- 
"Non sapete voi parlar' Italiano?" 

ANA.  'Sfoot, the carp has no tongue.  

CRI.  Signior, in courtship, you are to bid your abettors forbear, 
and satisfy the monsieur's request.  

AMO.  Well, I will strike him more silent with admiration, and 
terrify his daring hither.  He shall behold my own play with my 
scholar.  Lady, with the touch of your white hand, let me reinstate 
you.  [LEADS MORIA BACK TO THE STATE.]  Provost, [TO ASOTUS.] begin 
to me at the "Bare Accost".  [A CHARGE.]  Now, for the honour of my 
discipline.  

HED.  Signior Amorphus, reflect, reflect; what means he by that 
mouthed wave? 

CRI.  He is in some distaste of your fellow disciple.  

MER.  Signior, your scholar might have played well still, if he 
could have kept his seat longer; I have enough of him, now.  He is 
a mere piece of glass, I see through him by this time.  

AMO.  You come not to give us the scorn, monsieur? 

MER.  Nor to be frighted with a face, signior.  I have seen the 
lions.  You must pardon me.  I shall be loth to hazard a reputation 
with one that has not a reputation to lose.  

AMO.  How! 

CRI.  Meaning your pupil, sir.  

ANA.  This is that black devil there.  

AMO.  You do offer a strange affront, monsieur.  

CRI.  Sir, he shall yield you all the honour of a competent 
adversary, if you please to undertake him.  

MER.  I am prest for the encounter.  

AMO.  Me! challenge me! 

ASO.  What, my master, sir!  'Slight, monsieur, meddle with me, do 
you hear: but do not meddle with my master.  

MER.  Peace, good squib, go out.  

CRI.  And stink, he bids you.  

ASO.  Master! 

AMO.  Silence!  I do accept him.  Sit you down and observe.  Me!  
he never profest a thing at more charges. -- Prepare yourself sir.  
-- Challenge me! I will prosecute what disgrace my hatred can 
dictate to me.  

CRI.  How tender a traveller's spleen is!  Comparison to men that 
deserve least, is ever most offensive.  

AMO.  You are instructed in our chartel, and know our weapons? 

MER.  I appear not without their notice, sir.  

ASO.  But must I lose the prizes, master? 

AMO.  I will win them for you; be patient. -- Lady, [TO MORIA.] 
vouchsafe the tenure of this ensign. -- Who shall be your stickler?

MER.  Behold him.  [POINTS TO CRITES.]

AMO.  I would not wish you a weaker. -- Sound, musics. -- I provoke 
you at the Bare Accost.  [A CHARGE.]

PHA.  Excellent comely! 

CRI.  And worthily studied.  This is the exalted foretop.  

HED.  O, his leg was too much produced.  

ANA.  And his hat was carried scurvily.  

PHI.  Peace; let's see the monsieur's Accost: Rare! 

PHA.  Sprightly and short.  

ANA.  True, it is the French courteau: he lacks but to have his 
nose slit.  

HED.  He does hop.  He does bound too much.  [A FLOURISH.]

AMO.  The second bout, to conclude this weapon.  [A CHARGE.]

PHA.  Good, believe it! 

PHI.  An excellent offer! 

CRI.  This is called the solemn band-string.  

HED.  Foh, that cringe was not put home.  

ANA.  He makes a face like a stabb'd Lucrece.  

ASO.  Well, he would needs take it upon him, but would I had done 
it for all this.  He makes me sit still here, like a baboon as I 
am.  

CRI.  Making villainous faces.  

PHI.  See, the French prepares it richly.  

CRI.  Ay, this is ycleped the Serious Trifle.  

ANA.  'Slud, 'tis the horse-start out o' the brown study.  

CRI.  Rather the bird-eyed stroke, sir.  Your observance is too 
blunt, sir.  [A FLOURISH.]

AMO.  Judges, award the prize.  Take breath, sir.  This bout hath 
been laborious.  

ASO.  And yet your critic, or your besongno, will think these 
things foppery, and easy, now! 

CRI.  Or rather mere lunacy.  For would any reasonable creature 
make these his serious studies and perfections, much less, only 
live to these ends? to be the false pleasure of a few, the true 
love of none, and the just laughter of all? 

HED.  We must prefer the monsieur, we courtiers must be partial.  

ANA.  Speak, guardian.  Name the prize, at the Bare Accost.  

MOR.  A pair of wall-eyes in a face forced.  

ANA.  Give the monsieur.  Amorphus hath lost his eyes.  

AMO.  I!  Is the palate of your judgment down?  Gentles, I do 
appeal.  

ASO.  Yes, master, to me: the judges be fools.  

ANA.  How now, sir! tie up your tongue, mungrel.  He cannot 
appeal.  

ASO.  Say, you sir? 

ANA.  Sit you still, sir.  

ASO.  Why, so I do; do not I, I pray you? 

MER.  Remercie, madame, and these honourable censors.  

AMO.  Well, to the second weapon, the "Better Regard".  I will 
encounter you better.  Attempt.  

HED.  Sweet Honour.  

PHI.  What says my good Ambition? 

HED.  Which take you at this next weapon?  I lay a Discretion with 
you on Amorphus's head.  

PHI.  Why, I take the French-behaved gentleman.  

HED.  'Tis done, a Discretion.  

CRI.  A Discretion!  A pretty court-wager!  Would any discreet 
person hazard his wit so? 

PHA.  I'll lay a Discretion with you, Anaides.  

ANA.  Hang 'em, I'll not venture a doit of Discretion on either of 
their heads.  

CRI.  No, he should venture all then.  

ANA.  I like none of their plays.  [A CHARGE.]

HED.  See, see! this is strange play! 

ANA.  'Tis too full of uncertain motion.  He hobbles too much.  

CRI.  'Tis call'd your court-staggers, sir.  

HED.  That same fellow talks so now he has a place! 

ANA.  Hang him! neglect him.  

MER.  "Your good ladyship's affectioned."

WIFE.  Ods so! they speak at this weapon, brother.  

ASO.  They must do so, sister; how should it be the Better Regard, 
else? 

PHA.  Methinks he did not this respectively enough.  

PHI.  Why, the monsieur but dallies with him.  

HED.  Dallies!  'Slight, see! he'll put him to't in earnest. -- 
Well done, Amorphus! 

ANA.  That puff was good indeed.  

CRI.  Ods me! this is desperate play: he hits himself o' the 
shins.  

HED.  An he make this good through, he carries it, I warrant him.  

CRI.  Indeed he displays his feet rarely.  

HED.  See, see! he does the respective leer damnably well.  

AMO.  "The true idolater of your beauties shall never pass their 
deities unadored: I rest your poor knight."

HED.  See, now the oblique leer, or the Janus: he satisfies all 
with that aspect most nobly.  [A FLOURISH.]

Cri.  And most terribly he comes off; like your rodomontado.  

PHA.  How like you this play, Anaides? 

ANA.  Good play; but 'tis too rough and boisterous.  

AMO.  I will second it with a stroke easier, wherein I will prove 
his language.  [A CHARGE.]

ANA.  This is filthy, and grave, now.  

HED.  O, 'tis cool and wary play.  We must not disgrace our own 
camerade too much.  

AMO.  "Signora, ho tanto obligo per le favore resciuto da lei; che 
veramente desidero con tutto il core, a remunerarla in parte: e 
sicurative, signora mea cara, che io sera sempre pronto a servirla, 
e honorarla.  Bascio le mane de vo' signoria." 

CRI.  The Venetian dop this.  

PHA.  Most unexpectedly excellent!  The French goes down certain.  

ASO.  As buckets are put down into a well;
Or as a school-boy --

CRI.  Truss up your simile, jack-daw, and observe.  

HED.  Now the monsieur is moved.  

ANA.  Bo-peep! 

HED.  O, most antick.  

CRI.  The French quirk, this sir.  

ANA.  Heart, he will over-run her.  

MER.  "Madamoyselle, Je voudroy que pouvoy monstrer mon affection, 
mais je suis tant malhereuse, ci froid, ci layd, ci -- Je ne scay 
qui de dire -- excuse moi, Je suis tout vostre."  [A FLOURISH.]

PHI.  O brave and spirited! he's a right Jovialist.  

PHA.  No, no: Amorphus's gravity outweighs it.  

CRI.  And yet your lady, or your feather, would outweigh both.  

ANA.  What's the prize, lady, at this Better Regard? 

MOR.  A face favourably simpering, and a fan waving.  

ANA.  They have done doubtfully.  Divide.  Give the favourable face 
to the signior, and the light wave to the monsieur.  

AMO.  You become the simper well, lady.  

MER.  And the wag better.  

AMO.  Now, to our "Solemn Address."  Please the well-graced 
Philautia to relieve the lady sentinel; she hath stood long.  

PHI.  With all my heart; come, guardian, resign your place.  

[MORIA COMES FROM THE STATE.]

AMO.  Monsieur, furnish yourself with what solemnity of ornament 
you think fit for this third weapon; at which you are to shew all 
the cunning of stroke your devotion can possibly devise.  

MER.  Let me alone, sir.  I'll sufficiently decipher your amorous 
solemnities. -- Crites, have patience.  See, if I hit not all their 
practic observance, with which they lime twigs to catch their 
fantastic lady-birds.  

CRI.  Ay, but you should do more charitably to do it more openly, 
that they might discover themselves mock'd in these monstrous 
affections.  [A CHARGE.]

MER.  Lackey, where's the tailor? 

ENTER TAILOR, BARBER, PERFUMER, MILLINER, JEWELLER, AND 
FEATHER-MAKER.  

TAI.  Here, sir.  

HED.  See, they have their tailor, barber, perfumer, milliner, 
jeweller, feather-maker, all in common! 

[THEY MAKE THEMSELVES READY ON THE STAGE.]

ANA.  Ay, this is pretty.  

AMO.  Here is a hair too much, take it off.  Where are thy mullets? 

MER.  Is this pink of equal proportion to this cut, standing off 
this distance from it? 

TAI.  That it is, sir.  

MER.  Is it so, sir?  You impudent poltroon, you slave, you list, 
you shreds, you -- BEATS THE TAILOR.]

HED.  Excellent!  This was the best yet.  

ANA.  Why, we must use our tailors thus: this is our true 
magnanimity.  

MER.  Come, go to, put on; we must bear with you for the times' 
sake.  

AMO.  Is the perfume rich in this jerkin? 

PER.  Taste, smell; I assure you, sir, pure benjamin, the only 
spirited scent that ever awaked a Neapolitan nostril.  You would 
wish yourself all nose for the love on't.  I frotted a jerkin for a 
new-revenued gentleman yielded me three-score crowns but this 
morning, and the same titillation.  

AMO.  I savour no sampsuchine in it.  

PER.  I am a Nulli-fidian, if there be not three-thirds of a 
scruple more of sampsuchinum in this confection, than ever I put in 
any.  I'll tell you all the ingredients, sir.  

AMO.  You shall be simple to discover your simples.  

PER.  Simple! why, sir?  What reck I to whom I discover?  I have 
it in musk, civet, amber, Phoenicobalanus, the decoction of 
turmerick, sesana, nard, spikenard, calamus odoratus, stacte, 
opobalsamum, amomum, storax, ladanum, aspalathum, opoponax, 
oenanthe.  And what of all these now? what are you the better?  
Tut, it is the sorting, and the dividing, and the mixing, and the 
tempering, and the searching, and the decocting, that makes the 
fumigation and the suffumigation.  

AMO.  Well, indue me with it.  

PER.  I will, sir.  

HED.  An excellent confection.  

CRI.  And most worthy a true voluptuary, Jove! what a coil these 
musk-worms take to purchase another's delight? for themselves, who 
bear the odours, have ever the least sense of them.  Yet I do like 
better the prodigality of jewels and clothes, whereof one passeth 
to a man's heirs; the other at least wears out time.  This 
presently expires, and, without continual riot in reparation, is 
lost: which whoso strives to keep, it is one special argument to 
me, that, affecting to smell better than other men, he doth indeed 
smell far worse.  

MER.  I know you will say, it sits well, sir.  

TAI.  Good faith, if it do not, sir, let your mistress be judge.  

MER.  By heaven, if my mistress do not like it, I'll make no more 
conscience to undo thee, than to undo an oyster.  

TAI.  Believe it, there's ne'er a mistress in the world can mislike 
it.  

MER.  No, not goodwife tailor, your mistress; that has only the 
judgment to heat your pressing-tool.  But for a court-mistress that 
studies these decorums, and knows the proportion of every cut to a 
hair, knows why such a colour is cut upon such a colour, and when a 
satin is cut upon six taffataes, will look that we should dive into 
the depth of the cut -- Give me my scarf.  Shew some ribands, 
sirrah.  Have you the feather? 

FEAT.  Ay, sir.  

MER.  Have you the jewel? 

JEW.  Yes, sir.  

MER.  What must I give for the hire on't? 

JEW.  You shall give me six crowns, sir.  

MER.  Six crowns!  By heaven, 'twere a good deed to borrow it of 
thee to shew, and never let thee have it again.  

JEW.  I hope your worship will not do so, sir.  

MER.  By Jove, sir, there be such tricks stirring, I can tell you, 
and worthily too.  Extorting knaves, that live by these 
court-decorums, and yet -- What's your jewel worth, I pray? 

JEW.  A hundred crowns, sir.  

MER.  A hundred crowns, and six for the loan on't an hour! what's 
that in the hundred for the year?  These impostors would not be 
hang'd!  Your thief is not comparable to them, by Hercules.  Well, 
put it in, and the feather; you will have it and you shall, and the 
pox give you good on't! 

AMO.  Give me my confects, my moscadini, and place those colours in 
my hat.  

MER.  These are Bolognian ribands, I warrant you.  

MIL.  In truth, sir, if they be not right Granado silk --

MER.  A pox on you, you'll all say so.  

MIL.  You give me not a penny, sir.  

MER.  Come, sir, perfume my devant;
"May it ascend, like solemn sacrifice,
Into the nostrils of the Queen of Love!"  

HED.  Your French ceremonies are the best.  

ANA.  Monsieur, signior, your Solemn Address is too long; the 
ladies long to have you come on.  

AMO.  Soft, sir, our coming on is not so easily prepared.  Signior 
Fig! 

PER.  Ay, sir.  

AMO.  Can you help my complexion, here? 

PER.  O yes, sir, I have an excellent mineral fucus for the 
purpose.  The gloves are right, sir; you shall bury them in a 
muck-hill, a draught, seven years, and take them out and wash them, 
they shall still retain their first scent, true Spanish.  There's 
ambre in the umbre.  

MER.  Your price, sweet Fig? 

PER.  Give me what you will, sir; the signior pays me two crowns a 
pair; you shall give me your love, sir.  

MER.  My love! with a pox to you, goodman Sassafras.  

PER.  I come, sir.  There's an excellent diapasm in a chain, too, 
if you like it.  

AMO.  Stay, what are the ingredients to your fucus? 

PER.  Nought but sublimate and crude mercury, sir, well prepared 
and dulcified, with the jaw-bones of a sow, burnt, beaten, and 
searced.  

AMO.  I approve it.  Lay it on.  

MER.  I'll have your chain of pomander, sirrah; what's your price? 

PER.  We'll agree, monsieur; I'll assure you it was both decocted 
and dried where no sun came, and kept in an onyx ever since it was 
balled.  

MER.  Come, invert my mustachio, and we have done.  

AMO.  'Tis good.  

BAR.  Hold still, I pray you, sir.  

PER.  Nay, the fucus is exorbitant, sir.  

MER.  Death, dost thou burn me, harlot! 

BAR.  I beseech you, sir.  

MER.  Beggar, varlet, poltroon.  [BEATS HIM.]

HED.  Excellent, excellent! 

ANA.  Your French beat is the most natural beat of the world.  

ASO.  O that I had played at this weapon.  [A CHARGE.]

PHA.  Peace, now they come on; the second part.  

AMO.  "Madam, your beauties being so attractive, I muse you are 
left thus alone." 

PHI.  "Better be alone, sir, than ill accompanied." 

AMO.  "Nought can be ill, lady, that can come near your goodness." 

MER.  "Sweet madam, on what part of you soever a man casts his eye, 
he meets with perfection; you are the lively image of Venus 
throughout; all the graces smile in your cheeks; your beauty 
nourishes as well as delights; you have a tongue steeped in honey, 
and a breath like a panther; your breasts and forehead are whiter 
than goats' milk, or May blossoms; a cloud is not so soft as your 
skin --" 

HED.  Well strook, monsieur!  He charges like a Frenchman indeed, 
thick and hotly.  

MER.  "Your cheeks are Cupid's baths, wherein he uses to steep 
himself in milk and nectar: he does light all his torches at your 
eyes, and instructs you how to shoot and wound with their beams. 
Yet I love nothing in you more than your innocence; you retain so 
native a simplicity, so unblamed a behaviour!  Methinks, with such 
a love, I should find no head, nor foot of my pleasure: you are 
the very spirit of a lady." 

ANA.  Fair play, monsieur, you are too hot on the quarry; give your 
competitor audience.  

AMO.  "Lady, how stirring soever the monsieur's tongue is, he will 
lie by your side more dull than your eunuch." 

ANA.  A good stroke; that mouth was excellently put over.  

AMO.  "You are fair, lady --" 

CRI.  You offer foul, signior, to close; keep your distance; for 
all your bravo rampant here.  

AMO.  "I say you are fair, lady, let your choice be fit, as you are 
fair." 

MER.  "I say ladies do never believe they are fair, till some fool 
begins to doat upon them." 

PHI.  You play too rough, gentlemen.  

AMO.  "Your frenchified fool is your only fool, lady: I do yield 
to this honourable monsieur in all civil and humane courtesy." 

[A FLOURISH.]

MER.  Buz! 

ANA.  Admirable.  Give him the prize, give him the prize: that 
mouth again was most courtly hit, and rare.  

AMO.  I knew I should pass upon him with the bitter bob.  

HED.  O, but the reverse was singular.  

PHA.  It was most subtile, Amorphus.  

ASO.  If I had done't, it should have been better.  

MER.  How heartily they applaud this, Crites! 

CRI.  You suffer them too long.  

MER.  I'll take off their edge instantly.  

ANA.  Name the prize, at the "Solemn Address."  

PHI.  Two lips wagging.  

CRI.  And never a wise word, I take it.  

ANA.  Give to Amorphus.  And, upon him again; let him not draw free 
breath.  

AMO.  Thanks, fair deliverer, and my honourable judges.  Madam 
Phantaste, you are our worthy object at this next weapon.  

PHA.  Most covetingly ready, Amorphus.  

[SHE TAKES THE STATE INSTEAD OF PHILAUTIA.]

HED.  Your monsieur is crest-fallen.  

ANA.  So are most of them once a year.  

AMO.  You will see, I shall now give him the gentle Dor presently, 
he forgetting to shift the colours, which are now changed with 
alteration of the mistress.  At your last weapon, sir.  "The 
Perfect Close."  Set forward.  [A CHARGE.]  Intend your approach, 
monsieur.  

MER.  'Tis yours, signior.  

AMO.  With your example, sir.  

MER.  Not I, sir.  

AMO.  It is your right.  

MER.  By no possible means.  

AMO.  You have the way.  

MER.  As I am noble --

AMO.  As I am virtuous --

MER.  Pardon me, sir.  

AMO.  I will die first.  

MER.  You are a tyrant in courtesy.  

AMO.  He is removed. -- [STAYS MERCURY ON HIS MOVING.] -- Judges, 
bear witness.  

MER.  What of that, sir? 

AMO.  You are removed, sir.  

MER.  Well.  

AMO.  I challenge you; you have received the Dor.  Give me the 
prize.  

MER.  Soft, sir.  How, the Dor? 

AMO.  The common mistress, you see, is changed.  

MER.  Right, sir.  

AMO.  And you have still in your hat the former colours.  

MER.  You lie, sir, I have none: I have pulled them out.  I meant 
to play discoloured.  [A FLOURISH.]

CRI.  The Dor, the Dor, the Dor, the Dor, the Dor, the palpable 
Dor! 

ANA.  Heart of my blood, Amorphus, what have you done? stuck a 
disgrace upon us all, and at your last weapon! 

ASO.  I could have done no more.  

HED.  By heaven, it was most unfortunate luck.  

ANA.  Luck! by that candle, it was mere rashness, and oversight; 
would any man have ventured to play so open, and forsake his ward?  
D--n me, if he have not eternally undone himself in court, and 
discountenanced us that were his main countenance, by it.  

AMO.  Forgive it now: it was the solecism of my stars.  

CRI.  The wring by the hand, and the banquet, is ours.  

MER.  O, here's a lady feels like a wench of the first year; you 
would think her hand did melt in your touch; and the bones of her 
fingers ran out at length when you prest 'em, they are so gently 
delicate!  He that had the grace to print a kiss on these lips, 
should taste wine and rose-leaves.  O, she kisses as close as a 
cockle.  Let's take them down, as deep as our hearts, wench, till 
our very souls mix.  Adieu, signior: good faith I shall drink to 
you at supper, sir.  

ANA.  Stay, monsieur.  Who awards you the prize? 

CRI.  Why, his proper merit, sir; you see he has played down your 
grand garb-master, here.  

ANA.  That's not in your logic to determine, sir: you are no 
courtier.  This is none of your seven or nine beggarly sciences, but 
a certain mystery above them, wherein we that have skill must 
pronounce, and not such fresh men as you are.  

CRI.  Indeed, I must declare myself to you no profest courtling; 
nor to have any excellent stroke at your subtile weapons; yet if 
you please, I dare venture a hit with you, or your fellow, sir 
Dagonet, here.  

ANA.  With me! 

CRI.  Yes, sir.  

ANA.  Heart, I shall never have such a fortune to save myself in a 
fellow again, and your two reputations, gentlemen, as in this. 
I'll undertake him.  

HED.  Do, and swinge him soundly, good Anaides.  

ANA.  Let me alone; I'll play other manner of play, than has been 
seen yet.  I would the prize lay on't.  

MER.  It shall if you will, I forgive my right.  

ANA.  Are you so confident! what's your weapon? 

CRI.  At any, I, sir.  

MER.  The Perfect Close, that's now the best.  

ANA.  Content, I'll pay your scholarity.  Who offers? 

CRI.  Marry, that will I: I dare give you that advantage too.  

ANA.  You dare! well, look to your liberal sconce.  

AMO.  Make your play still, upon the answer, sir.  

ANA.  Hold your peace, you are a hobby-horse.  

ASO.  Sit by me, master.  

MER.  Now, Crites, strike home.  [A CHARGE.]

CRI.  You shall see me undo the assured swaggerer with a trick, 
instantly: I will play all his own play before him; court the wench 
in his garb, in his phrase, with his face; leave him not so much as 
a look, an eye, a stalk, or an imperfect oath, to express himself 
by, after me.  [ASIDE TO MERCURY.]

MER.  Excellent, Crites.  

ANA.  When begin you, sir? have you consulted? 

CRI.  To your cost, sir.  Which is the piece stands forth to be 
courted?  O, are you she?  [TO PHILAUTIA.]  "Well, madam, or sweet 
lady, it is so, I do love you in some sort, do you conceive? and 
though I am no monsieur, nor no signior, and do want, as they say, 
logic and sophistry, and good words, to tell you why it is so; yet 
by this hand and by that candle it is so: and though I be no 
book-worm, nor one that deals by art, to give you rhetoric and 
causes, why it should be so, or make it good it is so? yet, d--n 
me, but I know it is so, and am assured it is so, and I and my 
sword shall make it appear it is so, and give you reason sufficient 
how it can be no otherwise but so --" 

HED.  'Slight, Anaides, you are mocked, and so we are all.  

MER.  How now, signior! what, suffer yourself to be cozened of 
your courtship before your face? 

HED.  This is plain confederacy to disgrace us: let's be gone, and 
plot some revenge.  

AMO.  "When men disgraces share,
The lesser is the care."  

CRI.  Nay, stay, my dear Ambition, [TO HEDON.]  I can do you over 
too.  You that tell your mistress, her beauty is all composed of 
theft; her hair stole from Apollo's goldy-locks; her white and red, 
lilies and roses stolen out of paradise; her eyes two stars, 
pluck'd from the sky; her nose the gnomon of Love's dial, that 
tells you how the clock of your heart goes: and for her other 
parts, as you cannot reckon them, they are so many; so you cannot 
recount them, they are so manifest.  Yours, if his own, unfortunate 
Hoyden, instead of Hedon.  [A FLOURISH.]

ASO.  Sister, come away, I cannot endure them longer.  

[EXEUNT ALL BUT MERCURY AND CRITES.]

MER.  Go, Dors, and you, my madam Courting-stocks,
Follow your scorned and derided mates;
Tell to your guilty breasts, what mere gilt blocks
You are, and how unworthy human states.

CRI.  Now, sacred God of Wit, if you can make
Those, whom our sports tax in these apish graces,
Kiss, like the fighting snakes, your peaceful rod,
These times shall canonise you for a god.

MER.  Why, Crites, think you any noble spirit,
Or any, worth the title of a man,
Will be incensed to see the enchanted veils
Of self-conceit, and servile flattery,
Wrapt in so many folds by time and custom,
Drawn from his wronged and bewitched eyes?
Who sees not now their shape and nakedness,
Is blinder than the son of earth, the mole;
Crown'd with no more humanity, nor soul.

CRI.  Though they may see it, yet the huge estate
Fancy, and form, and sensual pride have gotten,
Will make them blush for anger, not for shame,
And turn shewn nakedness to impudence.
Humour is now the test we try things in:
All power is just: nought that delights is sin.
And yet the zeal of every knowing man
Opprest with hills of tyranny, cast on virtue
By the light fancies of fools, thus transported.
Cannot but vent the Aetna of his fires,
T'inflame best bosoms with much worthier love
Than of these outward and effeminate shades;
That these vain joys, in which their wills consume
Such powers of wit and soul as are of force
To raise their beings to eternity,
May be converted on works fitting men:
And, for the practice of a forced look,
An antic gesture, or a fustian phrase,
Study the native frame of a true heart,
An inward comeliness of bounty, knowledge,
And spirit that may conform them actually
To God's high figures, which they have in power;
Which to neglect for a self-loving neatness,
Is sacrilege of an unpardon'd greatness.

MER.  Then let the truth of these things strengthen thee,
In thy exempt and only man-like course;
Like it the more, the less it is respected:
Though men fail, virtue is by gods protected. --
See, here comes Arete; I'll withdraw myself.  [EXIT.]

ENTER ARETE.

ARE.  Crites, you must provide straight for a masque,
'Tis Cynthia's pleasure.

CRI.  How, bright Arete!
Why, 'twere a labour more for Hercules:
Better and sooner durst I undertake
To make the different seasons of the year,
The winds, or elements, to sympathise,
Than their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure.  They agree!
What though all concord's born of contraries;
So many follies will confusion prove,
And like a sort of jarring instruments,
All out of tune; because, indeed, we see
There is not that analogy 'twixt discords,
As between things but merely opposite.

ARE.  There is your error: for as Hermes' wand
Charms the disorders of tumultuous ghosts;
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light than Nature's did arrive:
So, what could never in itself agree,
Forgetteth the eccentric property,
And at her sight turns forth with regular,
Whose sceptre guides the flowing ocean:
And though it did not, yet the most of them
Being either courtiers, or not wholly rude,
Respect of majesty, the place, and presence,
Will keep them within ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masqued like others: for, in troth, not so
To incorporate them, could be nothing else,
Than like a state ungovern'd, without laws;
Or body made of nothing but diseases:
The one, through impotency, poor and wretched;
The other, for the anarchy, absurd.

CRI.  But, lady, for the revellers themselves,
It would be better, in my poor conceit,
That others were employ'd; for such as are
Unfit to be in Cynthia's court, can seem
No less unfit to be in Cynthia's sports.

ARE.  That, Crites, is not purposed without
Particular knowledge of the goddess' mind;
Who holding true intelligence, what follies
Had crept into her palace, she resolved
Of sports and triumphs; under that pretext,
To have them muster in their pomp and fulness,
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the reformation she intends.

CRI.  I now conceive her heavenly drift in all;
And will apply my spirits to serve her will.
O thou, the very power by which I am,
And but for which it were in vain to be,
Chief next Diana, virgin heavenly fair,
Admired Arete, of them admired
Whose souls are not enkindled by the sense,
Disdain not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.

ARE.  Leave to suspect us: Crites well shall find,
As we are now most dear, we'll prove most kind.

[WITHIN.]  Arete!

ARE.  Hark, I am call'd.  [EXIT.]

CRI.  I follow instantly.
Phoebus Apollo, if with ancient rites,
And due devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate Paeans on thy golden shrine,
Or sung thy triumphs in a lofty strain,
Fit for a theatre of gods to hear:
And thou, the other son of mighty Jove,
Cyllenian Mercury, sweet Maia's joy,
If in the busy tumults of the mind
My path thou ever hast illumined,
For which thine altars I have oft perfumed,
And deck'd thy statues with discolour'd flowers:
Now thrive invention in this glorious court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
Cynthia may grace, and give it life by sight.  [EXIT.]


SCENE III.

ENTER HESPERUS, CYNTHIA, ARETE, TIME, PHRONESIS, AND THAUMA.

MUSIC ACCOMPANIED.  HESPERUS SINGS.

Queen and huntress, chaste and fair,
Now the sun is laid to sleep,
Seated in thy silver chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
Hesperus entreats thy light,
Goddess, excellently bright.

Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare itself to interpose;
Cynthia's shining orb was made
Heav'n to clear, when day did close:
Bless us then with wished sight,
Goddess excellently bright.

Lay thy bow of pearl apart,
And thy crystal shining quiver;
Give unto the flying hart
Space to breathe, how short soever:
Thou, that mak'st a day of night,
Goddess excellently bright.

CYN.  When hath Diana, like an envious wretch,
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world the precious use
Of hoarded wealth, withheld her friendly aid?
Monthly we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our virgin-waxen torch
To burn and blaze, while nutriment doth last:
That once consumed, out of Jove's treasury
A new we take, and stick it in our sphere,
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men
Their look'd-for light.  Yet what is their desert?
Bounty is wrong'd, interpreted as due;
Mortals can challenge not a ray, by right,
Yet do expect the whole of Cynthia's light.
But if that deities withdrew their gifts
For human follies, what could men deserve
But death and darkness?  It behoves the high,
For their own sakes, to do things worthily.

ARE.  Most true, most sacred goddess; for the heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do:
Nor Jove, nor you, nor other heavenly Powers,
Are fed with fumes, which do from incense rise,
Or sacrifices reeking in their gore;
Yet, for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper good it is that they be so;)
You well are pleased with odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when.

CYN.  Else, noble Arete, they would not blame,
And tax, or for unjust, or for as proud,
Thy Cynthia, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown;
Such is our chastity, which safely scorns,
Not love, for who more fervently doth love
Immortal honour, and divine renown?
But giddy Cupid, Venus' frantic son.
Yet, Arete, if by this veiled light
We but discover'd (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame
With note of lightness, from these revels near:
Not, for the empire of the universe,
Should night, or court, this whatsoever shine,
Or grace of ours, unhappily enjoy.
Place and occasion are two privy thieves;
And from poor innocent ladies often steal
The best of things, an honourable name;
To stay with follies, or where faults may be,
Infers a crime, although the party free.

ARE.  How Cynthianly, that is, how worthily
And like herself, the matchless Cynthia speaks!
Infinite jealousies, infinite regards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But Phoebe lives from all, not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free.
Thy presence broad-seals our delights for pure;
What's done in Cynthia's sight, is done secure.

CYN.  That then so answer'd, dearest Arete,
What th' argument, or of what sort our sports
Are like to be this night, I not demand.
Nothing which duty, and desire to please,
Bears written in the forehead, comes amiss.
But unto whose invention must we owe
The complement of this night's furniture?

ARE.  Excellent goddess, to a man's, whose worth,
Without hyperbole, I thus may praise;
One at least studious of deserving well,
And, to speak truth, indeed deserving well.
Potential merit stands for actual,
Where only opportunity doth want,
Not will, nor power; both which in him abound,
One whom the Muses and Minerva love;
For whom should they, than Crites, more esteem,
Whom Phoebus, though not Fortune, holdeth dear?
And, which convinceth excellence in him,
A principal admirer of yourself:
Even through the ungentle injuries of Fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears.  What other things
Of farther note do lie unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to shew,
And for a goddess graciously to judge.

CYN.  We have already judged him, Arete,
Nor are we ignorant how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities
Which times and vicious persons cast on them.
Ourself have ever vowed to esteem
As virtue for itself, so fortune, base;
Who's first in worth, the same be first in place.
Nor farther notice, Arete, we crave
Then thine approval's sovereign warranty:
Let 't be thy care to make us known to him;
Cynthia shall brighten what the world made dim.

[EXIT ARETE.]


THE FIRST MASQUE.

ENTER CUPID, DISGUISED AS ANTEROS, FOLLOWED BY STORGE, AGLAIA, EUPHANTASTE,
AND APHELEIA.

CUP.  Clear pearl of heaven, and, not to be farther ambitious in 
titles, Cynthia! the fame of this illustrious night, among others, 
hath also drawn these four fair virgins from the palace of their 
queen Perfection, (a word which makes no sufficient difference 
betwixt her's and thine,) to visit thy imperial court: for she, 
their sovereign, not finding where to dwell among men, before her 
return to heaven, advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to 
thy celestial service, as in whose clear spirit (the proper element 
and sphere of virtue) they should behold not her alone, their 
ever-honoured mistress, but themselves (more truly themselves) to 
live enthronised.  Herself would have commended them unto thy 
favour more particularly, but that she knows no commendation is 
more available with thee, than that of proper virtue.  Nevertheless 
she willed them to present this crystal mound, a note of monarchy, 
and symbol of perfection, to thy more worthy deity; which, as here 
by me they most humbly do, so amongst the rarities thereof, that is 
the chief, to shew whatsoever the world hath excellent, howsoever 
remote and various.  But your irradiate judgment will soon 
discover the secrets of this little crystal world.  Themselves,
to appear more plainly, because they know nothing more odious then
false pretexts, have chosen to express their several qualities
thus in several colours.

The first, in citron colour, is natural affection, which, given us 
to procure our good, is sometime called Storge; and as every one is 
nearest to himself, so this handmaid of reason, allowable 
Self-love, as it is without harm, so are none without it: her 
place in the court of Perfection was to quicken minds in the 
pursuit of honour.  Her device is a perpendicular level, upon a 
cube or square; the word, "se suo modulo"; alluding to that true 
measure of one's self, which as every one ought to make, so is it 
most conspicuous in thy divine example.  

The second, in green is Aglaia, delectable and pleasant 
conversation, whose property it is to move a kindly delight, and 
sometime not without laughter: her office to entertain assemblies, 
and keep societies together with fair familiarity.  Her device, 
within a ring of clouds, a heart with shine about it; the word, 
'curarum nubila pello': an allegory of Cynthia's light, which no 
less clears the sky then her fair mirth the heart.  

The third, in the discoloured mantle spangled all over, is
Euphantaste, a well-conceited Wittiness, and employed in honouring
the court with the riches of her pure invention.  Her device, upon
a Petasus, or Mercurial hat, a crescent; The word; "sic laus
ingenii"; inferring that the praise and glory of wit doth ever
increase, as doth thy growing moon.  

The fourth, in white, is Apheleia, a nymph as pure and simple as the
soul, or as an abrase table, and is therefore called Simplicity; 
without folds, without plaits, without colour, without counterfeit; 
and (to speak plainly) plainness itself.  Her device is no device. 
The word under her silver shield, "omnis abest fucus"; alluding to 
thy spotless self, who art as far from impurity as from mortality.  

Myself, celestial goddess, more fit for the court of Cynthia than 
the arbours of Cytherea, am called Anteros, or Love's enemy; the 
more welcome therefore to thy court, and the fitter to conduct this 
quaternion, who, as they are thy professed votaries, and for that 
cause adversaries to Love, yet thee, perpetual virgin, they both 
love, and vow to love eternally.  

RE-ENTER ARETE, WITH CRITES.  

CYN.  Not without wonder, nor without delight
Mine eyes have view'd, in contemplation's depth,
This work of wit, divine and excellent:
What shape, what substance, or what unknown power,
In virgin's habit, crown'd with laurel leaves,
And olive-branches woven in between,
On sea-girt rocks, like to a goddess shines!
O front!  O face!  O all celestial, sure,
And more than mortal!  Arete, behold
Another Cynthia, and another queen,
Whose glory, like a lasting plenilune,
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane.
Nor under heaven an object could be found
More fit to please.  Let Crites make approach.
Bounty forbids to pall our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favour, after view:
The time of grace is, when the cause is new.

ARE.  Lo, here the man, celestial Delia,
Who (like a circle bounded in itself)
Contains as much as man in fulness may.
Lo, here the man; who not of usual earth,
But of that nobler and more precious mould
Which Phoebus' self doth temper, is composed;
And who, though all were wanting to reward,
Yet to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy favours gain is his ambition's most,
And labour's best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.

CYN.  With no less pleasure than we have beheld
This precious crystal work of rarest wit,
Our eye doth read thee, now instiled, our Crites;
Whom learning, virtue, and our favour last,
Exempteth from the gloomy multitude.
With common eye the Supreme should not see:
Henceforth be ours, the more thyself to be.

CRI.  Heaven's purest light, whose orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy praise; divinest Cynthia!
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thine (save therein) the most unworthy Crites
Doth find himself! for ever shine thy fame;
Thine honours ever, as thy beauties do.
In me they must, my dark world's chiefest lights,
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed Arete hath pleased to name,
As marks, to which my endeavour's steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.


THE SECOND MASQUE.

ENTER MERCURY AS A PAGE, INTRODUCING EUCOSMOS, EUPATHES, EUTOLMOS, AND EUCOLOS.

MER.  Sister of Phoebus, to whose bright orb we owe, that we not 
complain of his absence; these four brethren (for they are 
brethren, and sons of Eutaxia, a lady known, and highly beloved of 
your resplendent deity) not able to be absent, when Cynthia held a 
solemnity, officiously insinuate themselves into thy presence: for, 
as there are four cardinal virtues, upon which the whole frame of 
the court doth move, so are these the four cardinal properties, 
without which the body of compliment moveth not.  With these four 
silver javelins, (which they bear in their hands) they support in 
princes' courts the state of the presence, as by office they are
obliged: which, though here they may seem superfluous, yet, for
honour's sake, they thus presume to visit thee, having also been
employed in the palace of queen Perfection.  And though to them
that would make themselves gracious to a goddess, sacrifices were
fitter than presents, or impresses, yet they both hope thy favour,
and (in place of either) use several symbols, containing the
titles of thy imperial dignity.

First, the hithermost, in the changeable blue and green robe, is
the commendably-fashioned gallant Eucosmos; whose courtly habit is
the grace of the presence, and delight of the surveying eye; whom
ladies understand by the names of Neat and Elegant.  His symbol
is, "divae virgini," in which he would express thy deity's
principal glory, which hath ever been virginity.

The second, in the rich accoutrement, and robe of purple, empaled
with gold, is Eupathes; who entertains his mind with an harmless,
but not incurious variety; all the objects of his senses are
sumptuous, himself a gallant, that, without excess, can make use
of superfluity, go richly in embroideries, jewels, and what not,
without vanity, and fare delicately without gluttony; and
therefore (not without cause) is universally thought to be of fine
humour.  His symbol is, "divae optimae"; an attribute to express
thy goodness, in which thou so resemblest Jove thy father.

The third, in the blush-coloured suit, is Eutolmos, as duly
respecting others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by
the title of good Audacity; to courts and courtly assemblies a
guest most acceptable.  His symbol is, "divae viragini"; to
express thy hardy courage in chase of savage beasts, which harbour
in woods and wildernesses.

The fourth, in watchet tinsel, is the kind and truly benefique
Eucolos, who imparteth not without respect, but yet without
difficulty, and hath the happiness to make every kindness seem
double, by the timely and freely bestowing thereof.  He is the
chief of them, who by the vulgar are said to be of good nature.
His symbol is, "divae maximae"; an adjunct to signify thy
greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell, is formidable.

MUSIC.  A DANCE BY THE TWO MASQUES JOINED, DURING WHICH CUPID AND 
MERCURY RETIRE TO THE SIDE OF THE STAGE.  

CUP.  Is not that Amorphus, the traveller? 

MER.  As though it were not! do you not see how his legs are in 
travail with a measure? 

CUP.  Hedon, thy master is next.  

MER.  What, will Cupid turn nomenclator, and cry them? 

CUP.  No, faith, but I have a comedy toward, that would not be lost
for a kingdom.  

MER.  In good time, for Cupid will prove the comedy.  

CUP.  Mercury, I am studying how to match them.  

MER.  How to mismatch them were harder.  

CUP.  They are the nymphs must do it; I shall sport myself with 
their passions above measure.  

MER.  Those nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou 
has not arrows for the purpose.  

CUP.  O yes, here be of all sorts, flights, rovers, and 
butt-shafts.  But I can wound with a brandish, and never draw bow 
for the matter.  

MER.  I cannot but believe it, my invisible archer, and yet 
methinks you are tedious.  

CUP.  It behoves me to be somewhat circumspect, Mercury; for if 
Cynthia hear the twang of my bow, she'll go near to whip me with 
the string; therefore, to prevent that, I thus discharge a brandish 
upon -- it makes no matter which of the couples.  Phantaste and 
Amorphus, at you.  [WAVES HIS ARROW AT THEM.]

MER.  Will the shaking of a shaft strike them into such a fever of 
affection? 

CUP.  As well as the wink of an eye: but, I pray thee, hinder me 
not with thy prattle.  

MER.  Jove forbid I hinder thee; Marry, all that I fear is 
Cynthia's presence, which, with the cold of her chastity, casteth 
such an antiperistasis about the place, that no heat of thine will 
tarry with the patient.  

CUP.  It will tarry the rather, for the antiperistasis will keep it 
in.  

MER.  I long to see the experiment.  

CUP.  Why, their marrow boils already, or they are all turn'd 
eunuchs.  

MER.  Nay, an't be so, I'll give over speaking, and be a spectator 
only.  

[THE FIRST DANCE ENDS.] 

AMO.  Cynthia, by my bright soul, is a right exquisite and 
spendidious lady; yet Amorphus, I think, hath seen more fashions, I 
am sure more countries; but whether I have or not, what need we 
gaze on Cynthia, that have ourself to admire? 

PHA.  O, excellent Cynthia! yet if Phantaste sat where she does, 
and had such attire on her head, (for attire can do much,) I say 
no more -- but goddesses are goddesses, and Phantaste is as she is!  
I would the revels were done once, I might go to my school of glass 
again, and learn to do myself right after all this ruffling.  

[MUSIC; THEY BEGIN THE SECOND DANCE.]

MER.  How now Cupid? here's a wonderful change with your brandish! 
do you not hear how they dote? 

CUP.  What prodigy is this? no word of love, no mention, no 
motion! 

MER.  Not a word my little ignis fatue, not a word.  

CUP.  Are my darts enchanted? is their vigour gone? is their 
virtue --

MER.  What!  Cupid turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha! 

CUP.  Laughs Mercury? 

MER.  Is Cupid angry? 

CUP.  Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded? 

MER.  A rare comedy, it shall be entitled Cupid's? 

CUP.  Do not scorn us Hermes.  

MER.  Choler and Cupid are two fiery things; I scorn them not.
But I see that come to pass which I presaged in the beginning.  

CUP.  You cannot tell: perhaps the physic will not work so soon 
upon some as upon others.  It may be the rest are not so resty.  

MER.  "Ex ungue"; you know the old adage; as these so are the 
remainder.  

CUP.  I'll try: this is the same shaft with which I wounded 
Argurion.  [WAVES HIS ARROW AGAIN.]

MER.  Ay, but let me save you a labour, Cupid: there were certain 
bottles of water fetch'd, and drunk off since that time, by these 
gallants.  

CUP.  Jove strike me into the earth! the Fountain of Self-love! 

MER.  Nay faint not Cupid.  

CUP.  I remember'd it not.  

MER.  Faith, it was ominous to take the name of Anteros upon you; 
you know not what charm or enchantment lies in the word: you saw, 
I durst not venture upon any device in our presentment, but was 
content to be no other then a simple page.  Your arrows' 
properties, (to keep decorum,) Cupid, are suited, it should seem, 
to the nature of him you personate.  

CUP.  Indignity not to be borne! 

MER.  Nay rather, an attempt to have been forborne.  

[THE SECOND DANCE ENDS.]

CUP.  How might I revenge myself on this insulting Mercury?  
there's Crites, his minion, he has not tasted of this water?
[WAVES HIS ARROW AT CRITES.]  It shall be so.  Is Crites
turn'd dotard on himself too? 

MER.  That follows not, because the venom of your shafts cannot 
pierce him, Cupid.  

CUP.  As though there were one antidote for these, and another
for him? 

MER.  As though there were not; or, as if one effect might not 
arise of diverse causes?  What say you to Cynthia, Arete, 
Phronesis, Time, and others there? 

CUP.  They are divine.  

MER.  And Crites aspires to be so.  

[MUSIC; THEY BEGIN THE THIRD DANCE.]

CUP.  But that shall not serve him.  

MER.  'Tis like to do it, at this time.  But Cupid is grown too 
covetous, that will not spare one of a multitude.  

CUP.  One is more than a multitude.  

MER.  Arete's favour makes any one shot-proof against thee, Cupid. 
I pray thee, light honey-bee, remember thou art not now in Adonis' 
garden, but in Cynthia's presence, where thorns lie in garrison 
about the roses.  Soft, Cynthia speaks.  

CYN.  Ladies and gallants of our court, to end,
And give a timely period to our sports,
Let us conclude them, with declining night;
Our empire is but of the darker half.
And if you judge it any recompence
For your faire pains, t' have earn'd Diana's thanks,
Diana grants them, and bestows their crown
To gratify your acceptable zeal.
For you are they, that not, as some have done,
Do censure us, as too severe and sour,
But as, more rightly, gracious to the good;
Although we not deny, unto the proud,
Or the profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so Actaeon, by presuming far,
Did, to our grief, incur a fatal doom;
And so, swoln Niobe, comparing more
Than he presumed, was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no crime to enter sacred bowers,
And hallowed places, with impure aspect,
Most lewdly to pollute?  Seems it no crime
To brave a deity?  Let mortals learn
To make religion of offending heaven.
And not at all to censure powers divine.
To men this argument should stand for firm,
A goddess did it, therefore it was good:
We are not cruel, nor delight in blood. --
But what have serious repetitions
To do with revels, and the sports of court?
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation.  Let it suffice
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious and lewd blasphemies.
For we are no less Cynthia than we were,
Nor is our power, but as ourself, the same:
Though we have now put on no tire of shine,
But mortal eyes undazzled may endure.
Years are beneath the spheres, and time makes weak
Things under heaven, not powers which govern heaven.
And though ourself be in ourself secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence.  Lo, this is all:
Honour hath store of spleen, but wanteth gall.
Once more we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your ta'en toil, which here let take an end:
And that we not mistake your several worths,
Nor you our favour, from yourselves remove
What makes you not yourselves, those clouds of masque
Particular pains particular thanks do ask.

[THE DANCERS UNMASK.]

How! let me view you.  Ha! are we contemn'd?
Is there so little awe of our disdain,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the court,
And, without forehead, boldly press so far,
As farther none?  How apt is lenity
To be abused! severity to be loath'd!
And yet, how much more doth the seeming face
Of neighbour virtues, and their borrow'd names,
Add of lewd boldness to loose vanities!
Who would have thought that Philautia durst
Or have usurped noble Storge's name,
Or with that theft have ventured on our eyes?
Who would have thought, that all of them should hope
So much of our connivence, as to come
To grace themselves with titles not their own?
Instead of med'cines, have we maladies?
And such imposthumes as Phantaste is
Grow in our palace?  We must lance these sores,
Or all will putrify.  Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud than this:
Take off our veil, that shadows many depart,
And shapes appear, beloved Arete -- So,
Another face of things presents itself,
Than did of late.  What! feather'd Cupid masqued,
And masked like Anteros?  And stay! more strange!
Dear Mercury, our brother, like a page,
To countenance the ambush of the boy!
Nor endeth our discovery as yet:
Gelaia, like a nymph, that, but erewhile,
In male attire, did serve Anaides? --
Cupid came hither to find sport and game,
Who heretofore hath been too conversant
Among our train, but never felt revenge:
And Mercury bare Cupid company.
Cupid, we must confess, this time of mirth,
Proclaim'd by us, gave opportunity
To thy attempts, although no privilege:
Tempt us no farther; we cannot endure
Thy presence longer; vanish hence, away!
[EXIT CUPID.]
You Mercury, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this plot we well perceive your hand.
But, (for we mean not a censorian task,
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe,)
Dear Arete, and Crites, to you two
We give the charge; impose what pains you please:
Th' incurable cut off, the rest reform,
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since revels were proclaim'd, let now none bleed.

ARE.  How well Diana can distinguish times,
And sort her censures, keeping to herself
The doom of gods, leaving the rest to us!
Come, cite them, Crites, first, and then proceed.

CRI.  First, Philautia, for she was the first,
Then light Gelaia in Aglaia's name,
Thirdly, Phantaste, and Moria next,
Main Follies all, and of the female crew:
Amorphus, or Eucosmos' counterfeit,
Voluptuous Hedon ta'en for Eupathes,
Brazen Anaides, and Asotus last,
With his two pages, Morus, and Prosaites;
And thou, the traveller's evil, Cos, approach,
Impostors all, and male deformities --

ARE.  Nay, forward, for I delegate my power.
And will that at thy mercy they do stand,
Whom they so oft, so plainly scorn'd before.
'Tis virtue which they want, and wanting it,
Honour no garment to their backs can fit.
Then, Crites, practise thy discretion.

CRI.  Adored Cynthia, and bright Arete,
Another might seem fitter for this task,
Than Crites far, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindicative,
Or mindful of contempts, which I contemn'd,
As done of impotence) must be remiss:
Who, as I was the author, in some sort,
To work their knowledge into Cynthia's sight,
So should be much severer to revenge
The indignity hence issuing to her name:
But there's not one of these who are unpain'd,
Or by themselves unpunished; for vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns delight itself to punishment.
But we must forward, to define their doom.
You are offenders, that must be confess'd;
Do you confess it?

ALL.  We do.

CRI.  And that you merit sharp correction?

ALL.  Yes.

CRI.  Then we (reserving unto Delia's grace
Her farther pleasure, and to Arete
What Delia granteth) thus do sentence you:
That from this place (for penance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of Self-love)
You, two and two, singing a Palinode,
March to your several homes by Niobe's stone,
And offer up two tears a-piece thereon,
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called Weeping-cross:
Because it standeth cross of Cynthia's way,
One of whose names is sacred Trivia.
And after penance thus perform'd you pass
In like set order, not as Midas did,
To wash his gold off into Tagus' stream;
  But to the Well of knowledge, Helicon;
Where, purged of your present maladies,
Which are not few, nor slender, you become
Such as you fain would seem, and then return,
Offering your service to great Cynthia.
This is your sentence, if the goddess please
To ratify it with her high consent;
The scope of wise mirth unto fruit is bent.

CYN.  We do approve thy censure belov'd Crites;
Which Mercury, thy true propitious friend,
(A deity next Jove beloved of us,)
Will undertake to see exactly done.
And for this service of discovery,
Perform'd by thee, in honour of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace
As shall become our bounty, and thy place.
Princes that would their people should do well,
Must at themselves begin, as at the head;
For men, by their example, pattern out
Their imitations, and regard of laws:
A virtuous court, a world to virtue draws.

[EXEUNT CYNTHIA AND HER NYMPHS, FOLLOWED BY ARETE AND CRITES: -- 
AMORPHUS, PHANTASTE, ETC., GO OFF THE STAGE IN PAIRS, SINGING THE  
FOLLOWING]

PALINODE.

AMO.  From Spanish shrugs, French faces, smirks, irpes, and all 
affected humours,  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

PHA.  From secret friends, sweet servants, loves, doves, and such 
fantastic humours,  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

AMO.  From stabbing of arms, flap-dragons, healths, whiffs, and all 
such swaggering humours,  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

PHA.  From waving fans, coy glances, glicks, cringes, and all such 
simpering humours, 

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

AMO.  From making love by attorney, courting of puppets, and paying
for new acquaintance.  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

PHA.  From perfumed dogs, monkies, sparrows, dildoes, and 
paraquettoes,

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

AMO.  From wearing bracelets of hair, shoe-ties, gloves, garters, 
and rings with poesies.  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

PHA.  From pargetting, painting, slicking, glazing, and renewing 
old rivelled faces.  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

AMO.  From 'squiring to tilt yards, play-houses, pageants, and all 
such public places.  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

PHA.  From entertaining one gallant to gull another, and making 
fools of either, 

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

AMO.  From belying ladies' favours, noblemen's countenance, coining
counterfeit employments, vain-glorious taking to them other men's 
services, and all self-loving humours,  

CHORUS.  Good Mercury defend us.  

MERCURY AND CRITES SING.

Now each one dry his weeping eyes,
And to the Well of Knowledge haste;
Where, purged of your maladies,
You may of sweeter waters taste:
And, with refined voice, report
The grace of Cynthia, and her court.

[EXEUNT.  


THE EPILOGUE.

Gentles, be't known to you, since I went in
I am turn'd rhymer, and do thus begin.
The author (jealous how your sense doth take
His travails) hath enjoined me to make
Some short and ceremonious epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a rogue:
He ties me to such laws as quite distract
My thoughts, and would a year of time exact.
I neither must be faint, remiss, nor sorry,
Sour, serious, confident, nor peremptory:
But betwixt these.  Let's see; to lay the blame
Upon the children's action, that were lame.
To crave your favour, with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the writer's faculty.
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The play, might tax the maker of Self-love.
I'll only speak what I have heard him say,
"By -- 'tis good, and if you like't, you may."

"Ecce rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit
Hoc volo: nunc nobis carmina nostra placent.
